on the under surface of the table, as indicated in the diagram? The object of the tilting would thus be to put the under surface of table at the inclination most suitable for this projection to obtain the shortest and most powerful grip. The experimenter may stand anywhere round the table except directly before the medium, and not interfere to any extent with the intensity of the phenomena; but he may not stand between medium and table. I do not wish to say anything more definite than the above at this point, but I would, even at this stage, draw the  reader's attention to the importance of the experiment.

Experiment 27: Adjustment of levitating force to suit an unsymmetrical loading of table.

This experiment was not arranged by me, but was given spontaneously by the operators. I had brought a wooden box about 3 in. x 3 in. and 9 in. high, containing an electric bell and dry battery, which 1 intended to use for another experiment. The weight of the box, which I placed on the table near the edge, was 3.8 lb. Suddenly levitation of the table unexpectedly began. Now, it is obvious that as the table weighed 10½ lb., and the box 3.8 lb., the centre of gravity of the two was some distance from the centre of the table. The operators, however, managed to keep the surface of the table nearly level, and they accomplished this by strong upward jerks if one of the edges sagged. They did not seem able to gauge the position of the combined centre of gravity with any accuracy, and so uncongenial did the uneven distribution of weight seem to be that they tried to jerk the electric-bell box over to the centre of the table, but failed.

JExperiment 28: To see if the operators could ring an electric bell.

An electric bell and dry cell were compactly fitted into a box (see Experiment 27), and the bell-push with contact button was fitted to the outside. The disposition of weight of the articles within the box, and the position of the push

without, were so arranged that the bell could not be rung by human finger without knocking the box over; i.e. in order to ring the bell the box would have to be held. Furthermore, the bell could only be rung by a force acting normally to button, for the wooden sleeve into which it fitted only allowed of in-and-out motion. Fig. 5 shows how the apparatus was arranged.

Box

conl-aininq

Electric Bell

and

Dry cell

.jasdrnta

Direction of-Push

*Fig. 5.*

I placed the box on the floor near the medium, into what I conjectured was the strongest part of the psychic field. Then I asked the operators to ring the bell. After a little wait the box was shuffled here and there about the floor. Then the bell was rung for an instant. After a further wait it was rung again and for a slightly longer time. Afterwards it was more easily rung, and towards the end of the seance quite easily. The longest continuous ring was for about sixty seconds. The box remained upright the whole

time. I was rather surprised that the operators evidently found some little difficulty at first in ringing the bell, but the reason was at anyrate partly apparent when I went into quantities. I found by experiment that the mechanical force required to cause electric contact was 0*8 lb. The area of the button v/as '246 sq. in., and (assuming uniform pressure) the psychic pressure was 0-8 - "246 = 3*24, say S lb. per sq. in., which was greatly in excess of the uniform pressure required to cause levitation of the table (the maximum value of the latter for my heaviest table was '04 lb. per sq. in.; see Experiment 17). A peculiar fact about this test was that while the bell was ringing, the push-button was not directly facing the medium, but was nearly opposite me, or perhaps at an angle of about 80° with the medium. The operators placed the box in this position themselves, so evidently it was in the most suitable place for the ringing of the bell. Perhaps the fact that, in order to prevent toppling over, the box had to be held from the back, had something to do with it.

Expe7iment 29: A small metal trumpet pulled when held in the hand.

The circle possessed for demonstration purposes, and for "direct" voice manifestations should such occur, a small conical metal trumpet about 18 in. long, open at both ends, about 2½ in. diameter at the large end and f in. at the small end. (See fig. 6.)

I held this small trumpet firmly by the hand at its small end, with the big end pointing into the air near the medium, at an angle of about 30° to the horizontal. I asked the operators to pull it. Nothing happened for some

twenty seconds or so, and then suddenly it was given a strong forward jerk which almost snatched it from my grasp. Further trials gave similar results. The angular direction in which I held the trumpet seemed to make little difference.

Experiment 30: Attempt to prevent table returning to centre of circle from far end opposite the medium.

Sometimes the table would move of itself to the edge of the circle opposite the medium. I, sitting outside the ring of sitters, would then lay hold of it, and, exerting all my strength, viould endeavour to prevent its return to the centre. I usually found this to be impossible. Some overwhelming force was evidently pulling in opposition — a force which appeared to be of the nature of a suction.

Eocpeiiment 31: A handkerchief placed on floor near medium.

I placed an ordinary white handkerchief on the floor near the medium, and asked the operators to move it about the room. Although I left it there for nearly half an hour it did not move perceptibly. At the time this seemed very strange, as one would naturally think that such a light article as a handkerchief could be easily moved about, when solid tables weighing over 10 lb. could be levitated and moved over the floor at a much greater distance from the medium. I think I now know the reason for this negative result, and I will refer to it later on.

Chapter V — Conditions Above, Under, And Round The Levitated Table

The experimenter, when he observes a table steadily at rest in the air, is confronted with a problem such as this: " How is the table supported? " There is obviously nothing material supporting it, for the space above it, underneath it, and all round it, is empty of anything which in the ordinary course of events could keep it levitated. How then is the levitation accomplished? The obvious thing to do is to examine as carefully as possible the regions above, below, and all round the table in the hope that during the investigation some fact may be struck which either may completely solve the matter by itself, or which in conjunction with other and allied facts will solve it. My method in this research was to get as many facts together as possible and to deduce the most likely solution from them.

The Region above the Levitated Table. — In my mind there is no doubt whatever that the region of space above the levitated table has nothing

to do with the levitation; or if it has anything to do with it, it is only of very secondary importance. My reasons for this conclusion are as follows: —

(1) An experimenter may enter the circle, may grasp the table from the top, may sit upon it, and in fact may do practically anything he likes so long as he keeps his arms and body above the top surface.

(2) Fairly strong light may be flashed upon the top surface without affecting the levitation, while the same amount of light flashed beneath the table will immediately cause it to drop.

The operators have no objection whatever to the experimenter placing his hand anywhere he pleases on the top of the table, or he can place foreign bodies upon it, can rest a pocket lamp upon it, and so on.

The Region round the Levitated Table. — There is only one place round the table which the observer may not cross, and that is the region between the medium and the levitated table. I myself many times while levitation has been in progress have moved inside the circle right round three sides of the table; and a visitor at an ordinary demonstration seance is allowed to walk inside the circle anywhere he pleases so long as he does not cross the line table to medium. In fact, the instructions to the visitor are as follows: " Get inside the circle (two of the sitters raise their arms to allow him to slip under and in), grip the table from the top any

way you please, and try to prevent it moving. You may move inside the circle anywhere you please so long as you don't get directly in front of the medium."

Therefore it is obvious that the only region of vital importance round the levitated table is that between table and medium. I will show later that the whole space between table and sitters has really some value — a very secondary one, it is true, but nevertheless a real and substantial value, — and that, on occasions, some at least of this space, other than that in front of the medium, is made use of by the operators.

The Region below the Table. — There is no doubt whatever that the space below the table is of prime importance to the levitation, and to movements of the table generally. I have many experiments to describe dealing with this region.

Conclusion. — Thus, by a simple process of observation and deduction, it is easily seen that while a table is levitated the regions of space about it really vital to the phenomenon are the space between medium and table and the space beneath the table. All other regions are either of secondary importance or are of no importance at all.

Experiment 32: A fairly strong light placed on

top of levitated table and on leaf under

top surface.

I took a pocket electric flashlight, covered the

lens with a few thicknesses of thin red tissue

paper, and placed the lamp upright on the levitated table. There it remained while the table moved gently up and down in the air, for quite a minute. On another occasion, when the battery was quite new, and the lens was covered only with two thicknesses of the thin red paper, I placed the lamp on the table before levitation, and then asked that levitation should be given. This, however, proved to be impossible. The light was too strong, and was shining too directly upon the medium. Generally speaking, it may be said that small concentrated sources of light close to the medium are bad for phenomena, but that a diffused light from some distance away, whose source is not concentrated but spread over a large area, such as a flame surface, is least inhibitive. When the table failed to levitate with the electric lamp standing vertically, I placed the lamp flatwise on its side on the table, with the lens end pointing away from the medium, when levitation immediately occurred and was kept up for a long time. The table had a lower leaf (the seance was held in my own drawing-room) about 9 in. from the floor, and the lamp was then placed on this flatwise, with illuminated end pointing away from the medium. After a little while the table was again levitated, and remained so for a fairly long time, although there seemed more difliculty in starting levitation with the light placed thus than when it was on the top surface. This would indicate that it is the lower portion

of the body of the medium which is most concerned in the phenomenon. These experiments also show that it is the end of the table nearest the medium and the region under the table near her that are affected during levitation.

Experiment 33: The table being steadily levitated, to discover what effect is produced on the levitation by sliding a body of considerable volume under the table.

The table used was the ordinary seance one. When it was steadily levitated, 1 gently moved a spring balance of the compression type 8½ in. high, and with a rectangular top surface 8 in. x 6 in., along the floor until it was underneath the table. No part of the balance was in contact with the legs or the under surface of the table or any part of it at all. There was a clear space of at least 18 in. between pan of balance and under surface of table (the reason I used a balance rather than a small wooden box or anything else, was because the balance was handy, as I was that evening doing other experiments with it). There was a positive result. The table, which before the experiment, was tranquil a few inches up in the air, fluttered (that is the only word which describes its motion) like a wounded bird and dropped gently to the floor.

Conclusion. — The space displaced by the balance is a factor in the levitation, and the levitation is in effect produced by some kind of an upward force upon the under surface of the

table; also, the region somewhat near the floor beneath the table is of importance in the production of the phenomenon.

Generally speaking, for the production of good phenomena the space underneath the table must be kept relatively darker than the rest of the room. This, in the case of the larger tables, is accomplished automatically, for the comparatively large area of surface places the under region in shadow. Therefore this region is the most troublesome to deal with throughout the whole room. Nevertheless, the light is strong enough for most purposes; and although scale readings cannot be obtained by sight, the sense of touch can be called in, as will be explained hereafter.

In order to discover, if possible, the kind and position of application of the supposed upward force applied to the table to levitate it, I performed a number of experiments which I shall now describe.

Experiment 34: Exploring the region under the legs of the levitated table by the hand.

The table used was the ordinary seance one, which weighs about 10½ lb. If the upward psychic force were exerted upon the bottom of the legs only, and not upon the under surface, there would be an upward force upon each leg of (10½-4) lb., say about 2½ lb. If a hand be placed under a leg with, say, palm upwards, it is reasonable to suppose that the reaction of

2| lb. immediately under the leg and exerted upon the palm of the hand would be perfectly apparent. To test this, then, when the table was steadily levitated I placed my right hand upon the floor, palm uppermost, immediately under each leg in succession, keeping the hand in each position for five or six seconds. (While carrying out these experiments I may mention that I was sitting inside the circle beside the table on the side remote from the medium; my reason for this particular position being that I might not disturb the field between medium and table.) The result of this experiment was entirely negative. I felt not the least sign of pressure upon my hand when it was under any of the legs, or when I gradually raised it from the floor till it touched the bottom of the legs, which would indicate that the phenomenon of levitation is not produced by an upward force on each leg, or, if there is such an upward force, it is a small one and only subsidiary to the main levitating force.

Experiment 35: Exploring the region under levitated table by the hand and arm.

If we suppose that the levitation is produced by a uniform upward pressure upon the under surface of the table, we find, from dividing the weight of the table by the area of its surface, that this upward pressure, in the case of the seance-table, would amount to '025 lb. per sq. in. (see Experiment 16). During steady levitation,

I placed the back of my open hand with palm presented to the field (a) upon the floor in various places under the table, and (b) upon the under surface of the table, but I experienced no sense of pressure anywhere. As, however, a pressure of '025 lb. per sq. in. over the few square inches of the palm would amount to very little, this result is not to be wondered at.

I put my arm right underneath the table from end to end near the floor, moving it gently to and fro, but I experienced, as before, no sense of pressure anywhere.

The general conclusion from Experiments 34 and 35 seems to be that the table is not levitated by means of forces applied under the legs only, for the forces would be comparatively large in that case, and the mere fact of the hand moving up from floor to bottom of the leg would certainly interfere with the levitation (see Experiment 33). This would still be the case if we are to suppose that psychic force cannot act on the bare human hand, owing, let us say, to some kind of an aura surrounding it which neutralises its effects. So it is pretty evident that any theory which bases levitation upon vertical upward psychic force upon the bottom of the legs is untenable. There is a special reason why no force should be felt on the hand when the latter is on the floor under the levitated table, which I shall deal with later on. Why there should be no sense of pressure experienced when my hand was touching various places

on the under surface of table may be due to the following reasons: —

(1) The upward force was too small in magnitude.

(2) The upward force was actually present, but owing to an aura from the hand (or hand and arm) the psychic force was neutralised over the hand, and was slightly increased in magnitude over the rest of the under surface in compensation, with the consequence that the table remained levitated. The volume of the hand and part of the arm beneath the table was probably too small to seriously interfere with the levitation (see Experiment 33).

Experiment 36: The effect of crossing the space beneath levitated table with a thin glass tube.

The table used was the ordinary seance one. When it was steadily levitated 1 took a thin glass tube, about f in. outside diameter and about 14 in. long, and, grasping the end of it in my hand, I moved it about below the table at various heights. Then 1 made a wide sweeping movement with it immediately under the legs, and beyond the base of the table on all sides, stretching my arm until the end of the rod came into contact one by one with the feet of the sitters. During this process the levitation was unaffected.

Conclusion. — A body of small area and bulk may be inserted below the table while it is levitated without affecting the phenomenon. I

have, however, reason to believe that this is not generally true, but only true when the levitation is a powerful one. To an uninstructed observer it might appear that there cannot be such a thing as reserve of force with regard to a levitated table, i.e. that a force of exact magnitude is required for the phenomenon, neither more nor less. But such a view does not go far enough. Sometimes there seems to be just sufficient force exerted to keep the table levitated and no more, in which case any disturbance, such as a hand being placed beneath it, causes it to drop; at other times, and most often, there seems to be a reserve of force to draw upon, so that there is immediate compensation for any small disturbance, and the table remains in the air.

Eooperiment 37: Exploring the region of space beneath the levitated table with a manometer.

Fig. 7 shows diagrammatically the main portions of the instrument.

A is a U-tube of glass, connected to a straight tube of glass C by a small piece of thick rubber tube at B. The free end of C is turned up at right angles. Both ends of the apparatus X and

Y are open to the atmosphere. A is half filled with water, and when there is equal gaseous pressure at X and Y the water remains at the same level in both limbs of the U-tube. If, however, there is greater gaseous pressure upon

Y than X, the water rises in the left-hand limb

of the U-tube and falls in the right-hand one, and the difference of heights is a measure of the difference of pressure. The length of the tube C was 14½ in. Fig. 7 shows the elements of the apparatus only. As a matter of fact, the manometer used was a fine instrument required for measuring the pressure of the gases in steamboiler flues. It has a cock which can be rotated by finger and thumb, so that the gaseous pressure

*Fig. 7.*

can be held at any instant, and thus the difference in heights of the columns of water examined at leisure.

If we suppose that there is a uniform upward pressure of "025 lb. per sq. in. under the table, and if we further suppose that this pressure is exerted by something of the nature of a gas, and that this gas is contained within limits beneath the table (although such suppositions appear unthinkable), then we might expect to see a difference of pressure indicated on the manometer of about '7 in.

During periods when the table was steadily levitated, I inserted the end Y of the manometer, with this end always pointing vertically upright, (a) immediately under a leg of the table, (b) at various places near the under surface of the table, (c) at several points in space between the floor and the surface of the table. The placing the tube in these positions in nowise affected the levitations. When I had held the tube in any one of the above-mentioned positions for a few seconds, I turned the tap (which would hold the gaseous pressure if such was there, and thus keep the difference in columnar heights of the water fixed), removed the instrument from below the table, and examined it in strong light. The results were entirely negative. There were no indications of difference of gaseous pressure anywhere.

Conclusion. — It would appear from this experiment that the levitation is not due to the static pressure of a fluid.

The results of several of the previous experiments gave me some reason to think that on the floor or close to the floor beneath the levitated table there might be a region where there was no psychic force acting, or that the levitating force was confined, as regards space, to a location just under the surface of the table. The question uppermost in my mind was: " Is there a direct reaction upon the floor, or does the region of psychic force end above the floor? " It is very natural to suppose, of course, that there is some kind of a

field extending between the under surface of the table and the floor immediately beneath, and that there is a direct stress across this medium. The hand might not be a sufficiently delicate instrument for cognising such a reaction supposing it to be in reality present, or there might be something about the human hand, such as an aura or an emanation, that would neutralise or nullify the action of psychic force in its vicinity. For a long time, so ignorant was I of the mechanics of the whole phenomenon, 1 was fully under the impression — or delusion, as I now know it to have been — that there was direct reaction on the floor under the levitated table.

Experivient 38: To discover if there is a reaction upon the floor or in the immediate neighbourhood of the floor under a levitated table.

The apparatus consists of (1) an electric bell and wires; (2) a dry battery; (3) the bell-push with button removed; (4) a piece of thin wood 5 in. square, with a small circular piece let into it at the centre which took the place of the button of the push.

In fig. 8, A is the elevation of the thin piece of square wood, B is the circular piece fixed to it, C is the bell-push, W the wires running to bell and battery. A piece of rough red cloth was tacked to the top of A, for I had found from experience that a piece of coarse coloured or dark cloth fixed to any body which is to be

acted on by psychic force facilitates the application of the force. The piece B rested on the top contact of the bellpush, and the consequence was that, when a slight downward force was applied to any part of A, electric contact was made and the bell rang. I so arranged matters that the weight of even the little finger resting on any part of the surface of A caused the bell to ring. The total height of the apparatus when it rested on the floor was not more than 2 in.

Method. — The table used was the one in my drawingroom, weight 16 lb., and the seance was held in my house.

Fig. 9 shows a rough sketch of it, levitated about a foot above the floor. It is to be noted that this table has a lower leaf as shown. When the table was levitated I slid the pressure apparatus along the floor, to and fro, here, there, and everywhere beneath the table. (The bell and battery were outside the circle.)

The result was that while the mechanism was beneath the table the bell did not ring.

Conclusion. — There is no reaction on the floor beneath the levitated table. This is a most important result — so important, indeed, that I have verified it completely by three other experi-FiG. 9.

ments (Experiments 51, 52, 61), which I do not describe here as they fit in better in connection with other and somewhat different tests. It will be seen that the question of a human hand with its possible aura does not come in here; the reaction, had it been present, would have been exerted on a wooden surface covered

with

rough cloth

the best kind of surface,

as experience shows, for the application of psychic force.

That the operators could make use of the pressure apparatus, and that the bell would have rung vigorously had there been the smallest psychic reaction upon it, is seen from the following experiment.

Experiment 39: To see if the operators could use the apparatus of Experiment 38 to ring the bell by the direct action of psychic force upon it.

I placed the apparatus on the floor away from the table, and asked the operators to reply to questions by ringing the bell instead of by their customary manner of raps on the floor. Immediately on request the bell was rung, and from then to the conclusion of the seance the operators communicated in that manner (and seemed, indeed, rather to enjoy the change). Likewise they wished us good-night by long rings on the bell instead of by their usual method of raps.

Chapter VI — Levitation Directly Above The Platform Of A Weighing-Machine

Before I came to the conclusion that during a normal levitation above the floor there was no reaction or pressure upon the floor under the table, I was of the opinion, as I have already mentioned, that some kind of equilibrium was established between the medium and the table involving a reaction upon the floor. This view, which I now know to have been erroneous, was nevertheless a fortunate one for me to adopt as it turned out, because I thereby learned, by experimental work, much more about the mechanism of levitation than I otherwise would. My purpose in this chapter is to describe and discuss experiments I carried out in which I obtained levitation immediately over the platform of the Avery weighing-machine (the machine already described in Chapter III.).

It will be remembered that the dimensions

of the platform of this machine were 22 in.

X 17 in. The ordinary seance-table measured

on top 24 in. x 17 in., and round the legs 17| in.

X 151 in. In order, therefore, to increase the effective area of the platform the drawing-board already mentioned (see Chapter 111.), 24 in. x 18 in., was tied to it.

Experiment 40: Preliminary trial of apparatus

to see if the operators were likely to be

able to carry out the required levitations.

This test was carried out with only four of

the members of the circle present, the medium

being included.

Fig. 10 shows the essential arrangements. A is the platform of the machine, B the drawingboard fixed to platform, C the back-rail of

*Fig. 10.*

machine, and D the table standing on drawingboard. The position of the medium throughout these tests is indicated by the letter M, the front of her body being parallel to the long edge of the table, and she sitting on her chair looking across the platform and not at the backrail.

The weight of the drawing-board = 5 lb. The weight of the table.. = 10 lb. 6 oz.

The table having been placed neatly on the board, the seance opened.

The machine was balanced for the total weight of table + drawing-board, viz. 15 lb. 6 oz. After some time two legs of the table were lifted up into the air, the other two remaining on the platform. The steelyard immediately went hard up against the top stop, indicating a greatly increased weight upon the machine.

{a) During one particular tilting (there were several of them) I balanced the steelyard at about 26 lb. Now the dead weight being 15 lb. 6 oz., and the table still resting on two legs on the platform, it was obvious that some kind of a force much in excess of that due to direct reaction was in operation.

(6) In another case of tilting, the weight registered on the machine was greater than 26 lb., though I did not actually measure it.

I got the impression, from observing pretty carefully some half a dozen cases of tilting at various angles, that with increasing height of raised end an increasing weight was put on the machine. Complete levitation did not occur. It seemed to me that the mere fact of partial levitation caused an extra back pressure, as it were, on the platform, a pressure that was always greater than the static load of 15 lb. 6 oz.

From the result of this experiment it seemed

to me likely that with the full circle present complete levitation would be obtained. Accordingly the next test was carried out with the full circle present.

Eaiperiment 41: The seance-table being levitated directly over the platform of the weighingmachine, to measure the reaction on the platform.

Weight of table... = 10 lb. 6 oz.

Weight of drawing-board.. = 5 lb. 0 oz. Total dead weight... = 15 lb. 6 oz.

The table was placed symmetrically on the drawing-board and the seance commenced. With the table in position there was only an inch or two of space outside the legs, and thus very little room for side play or for manipulation. The steelyard was balanced for the dead weight of 15 lb. 6 oz.

(A) Within a few minutes psychic force was being somewhere applied to the platform, for the steelyard was oscillated to and fro against the top stop. The table also jerked about on the narrow platform, and now and then an end was slightly raised but quickly lowered. This sort of thing continued off and on for a quarter of an hour or so, and I was beginning to think the operators would be unable to effect the required levitation. Then I heard seven or eight raps on the floor in succession, the prearranged signal that they wished to give a

message. By means of raps the following was spelt out: " Cover the drawing-board with a dark cloth." Now the drawing-board was white in colour, the original wood not having been varnished or touched in any way, and the trouble was apparently due to some kind of reflected white rays coming from its surface (see Experiment 31). The circle was accordingly broken for a few minutes while one of the members went downstairs for a thin piece of dark cloth, which was placed over the drawing-board. Its weight being only an ounce or two, did not materially affect the dead load. The experiment now proceeded much more successfully. The table was again oscillated on the platform, and was then lifted on two legs (two legs thus remaining on the machine and two in the air above it).

(B) This lifting coincided with a large apparent increase of weight, as much as 14 lb. additional to the value of the dead load being registered (compare Experiment 40). Several times was an end of the table thus raised, and on each occasion the sudden corresponding increase of weight, varying from a few pounds up to a maximum of about 14 lb., was noted. Complete levitation did not occur until about forty minutes after the opening of the seance, and then it only lasted for four or five seconds and was of a rather jerky type. (It was very evident that the phenomenon could only be produced with difficulty, owing chiefly, I believe, to the close approximation of areas of

base of table and of the platform, which allowed of very little manipulation.)

(C) But immediately it occurred, the registered weight, which was the previous instant several pounds above the dead-load value of 15 lb. 6 oz. (due no doubt to the preliminary tilting just before levitation, see Experiment 40 and (A) and (B) above), came back, and the steelyard balanced at something like the original load. During the next few minutes levitation took place several times, on each occasion increasing in duration and steadiness. At length almost perfect levitation, about 6 in. in height, was obtained, lasting for fully half a minute, with the surface of table almost level, and the table nearly steady and just covering the platform. With the exception of one case to be described later, it was the most wonderful levitation I have witnessed in the course of my investigation.

(D) Immediately it occurred the steelyard balanced at about 15½ lb., oscillating a pound or so on either side of this, in correspondence, apparently, with the slight up-and-down tremors of the table in the air.

Conclusions. — (1) With table tilted — only half levitated ((A) and (B) above) — there is on each occasion a reaction on the machine many pounds greater than the static load, and the magnitude of this reaction varies in some manner with the height of the tilting. This agrees absolutely with the result of Experiment 40.

(2) During fairly steady levitation the reaction

of the levitated table on platform is apparently nearly equal to the weight of the table (see (C) and (D) above).

(3) The movement of the table up and down in the air above the platform causes variations of a few pounds in the reaction as measured on the weighing-machine.

Experiment 42: Levitation of table No. 2 over platform of weighing-machine.

At the conclusion of Experiment 41, 1 removed the ordinary seance-table — which, on account of its nearness in size to the platform, required most careful manipulation and was on that account difficult to levitate — and placed a smaller bamboo table (table 2, p. 38) on the platform of the machine. The base area of this was much less than the other table, and there was consequently more room round it on the platform. I then balanced the steelyard for dead weight of table and drawing-board.

Weight of table... = 6 lb. Weight of drawing-board. = 5 lb. Total dead weight... =11 lb.

The seance was now near its conclusion and the psychic energy available was evidently at a maximum, for no sooner had I placed the table on the platform then it immediately rose into the air, and the levitation could apparently have been kept up for several minutes if I had desired it.

(A) With the exception of variations of a

pound or so, which seemed to correspond with small up-and-down jerks of the table in the air, the steelyard remained balanced as for the initial dead load of 11 lb. I watched with interest the small variations in registered weight, balanced by moving the rider a trifle this way and that, as the table sagged a little or was raised a little in the air.

Conclusion. — As in Experiment 41, the reaction on the platform of the weighing-machine appears to be about equal to the weight of the levitated table.

Expeiiment 43. — About a month after the date of Experiments 41 and 42, I carried out further similar tests on two more tables: {a) the ornamental bamboo table and (b) the stool (tables Nos. 3 and 4, p. 38).

Weights:— Table 3, 6 lb. 4 oz. Table 4, 2 lb. 12 oz.

With table 3 the levitation was prolonged, quite steady, and of an average height of about 7 in. The surface was not level but was inclined at an angle of about 30° to the horizontal, the lower edge, being towards the side of the platform farthest from the medium. When equilibrium was established, with the table steady in the air, the weighing-machine registered (subtracting the dead load of drawing-board) a reaction of about 13 lb. 6 oz.,

LEVITATION OVER PLATFORM

or more than double the weight of the table. But it was noticeable that the steelyard was just a little stiff, as though there was a sidethrust somewhere on the mechanism supporting the platform.

With table 4 (the stool) the levitation was also very good and prolonged, and of an average height of 9 to 10 in. The surface was also in this case inclined at an angle of about 30° to the horizontal, the sagging edge as before being farthest from the medium. A very heavy reaction was registered on the weighing-machine, and the steelyard was quite stiff. The average reaction (between weight needed to allow steelyard to rise and that necessary to cause it to fall) was no less than about 31 lb. 10 oz. (excluding weight of drawing-board). As soon as levitation was over, the machine instantly regained its usual sensitiveness. The following tabulation will enable results to be compared: —

Experim ent No.

Table No.

Character of levitation.

Weight of table.

Reaction due to levitated table (about)

43.

Level.

Level.

Inclined at about

30° to horizontal.

Inclined at about

30° to horizontal.

10 lb. 6 oz. 6 „ 4 „ 2,, 12 „

10 1b. Soz. 13 „ 6 „ 31 „ 10,,

In all cases I had plenty of time to make my observations, and I believe the results are accurate. With tables 1 and 2 I did not notice

any loss of sensitiveness of steelyard while measuring the reaction, but with table 3 there may have been a slight loss, and with table 4 there was certainly a great loss.

General Conclusions from the Four Levitations. — The results given above in the tabulation are, or were at the time I obtained them, extremely puzzling. The following are some observations I made at the time: —

It would seem that when the table is comparatively large — i.e. when its surface and base area bear some resemblance to the area of the platform— the reaction is practically equal to the weight of the table. (In the light of later and different experiments I do not now think this statement is altogether accurate. I now know that the height of the platform above the floor is the all-determining factor.) A rough comparison may be helpful. The area of the platform is 432 sq. in. The areas of the surfaces of tables 1 and 2 are 408 sq. in. and 271 sq. in. respectively, and their heights 29 in. and 27½ in., and in each of these cases the reaction is about equal to the weight of the table. In table 3 the area of the lower surface (there are two surfaces in this case, and it is reasonable to suppose that it is the lower one upon which the psychic pressure is exerted) is 90 sq. in., the area of the base is 144 sq. in., height 29 in., and there was a little sluggishness of the steelyard and a reaction about equal to twice the weight of the table. In the case of table 4 (the stool), whose surface

area is 175 sq. in., base area 64 sq. in., height 11½ in., there was very pronounced sluggishness of the steelyard and a reaction of about 11 times the weight of the table.

In the case of the stool the obvious stiffness of the steelyard showed that there was friction somewhere during levitation. Accordingly I carefully examined the balancing mechanism of the machine, and I have come to the conclusion that the temporary want of sensitiveness was due to a twist having been applied by the operators to the platform during the experiment. It is to be noted, as mentioned above, that immediately levitation was over, the machine was perfectly sensitive again. From this consideration I am obliged to think that a large part of the reaction as measured on the machine in the case of the stool was fictitious, and represents the effects of friction on the mechanism due to the twist, or to the reaction pressure being applied other than vertically to the platform, and that in the case of table 3 some of the reaction is due to the same cause.

I will show later that during an abnormal levitation, i.e. one efiected from a higher surface than the floor level (which I call a normal one), there is usually a horizontal component of the reaction acting on the platform straight outwards from the medium. This component would push the platform over on its fulcra and cause friction.

It remains to conjecture why with the stool

there should be such pronounced evidence of twist or oblique reaction on the platform, and none in the case of the large seance-table. After much consideration of the phenomenon, I have come to the conclusion that levitation of a table over a raised platform is much more difficult than over a level wooden floor. There seems to be a normal levitating level with reference to the position of medium. Any alteration in this normal relation of medium and table, such as putting the table on a raised platform, increases the inherent difficulty of the phenomenon. I think also that we have some slight evidence in the friction noticeable in the case of the stool that something in the nature of a " structure " is being used. The preliminary increases of weight registered during the beginning of levitation would also suggest this.

As already mentioned, I have satisfied myself that in the general case of levitation over the floor there is no back pressure or reaction upon the floor. It is to be noted that in levitation over the platform of the weighing-machine, whose surface is some 7 in. above the floor, the smallest reaction was equal to the weight of the table, and the largest was much greater. In experiments which I shall describe later I shall hope to give a reason for this apparently anomalous condition of things.

Chapter VII — Experiments With Compression Spring Balance Underneath The Levitated Table

Owing to the results of experiments in which levitation was effected over the platform of a weighing-machine not proving decisive, due to what appeared to be oblique reaction forces exerted on the platform causing twist and friction of the mechanism, I thought I would place an ordinary compression balance below the table and see what would happen during levitation, if indeed the phenomenon were possible with the balance there at all. I thought of using such a balance because only the vertical component of any reaction could be registered on it, and the machine was not delicate enough to be much affected by small horizontal components, assuming that such were present. The whole thing was merely guesswork, and I am sure I was as surprised as anybody when I found it came off successfully, and not only came off but gave exceedingly valuable results. In the experiments I am now going to describe there will be a certain amount of repetition,

but, as I have already said, such repetition in psychic research is valuable and indeed necessary, for opportunities of obtaining similar results are very limited, and every observation that shows the least trace of value should therefore be strictly preserved. Moreover, I only arrived at the proper capacity of balance required, and the best conditions for carrying out the experiments, by a system of trial and error; but during all these preliminary tests many results of much importance, not in the direct line of the main purpose of the experiments, were obtained.

Experiment 44: A spring compression balance being placed below the table, to see if the table could be levitated without reaction on the balance.

The table was the seance one, weight 10½ lb. The balance used was of the type employed in many households for weighing groceries. It had a circular dial registering up to 14 lb. by means of a pointer, and the material to be weighed was placed in a circular metal pan on top, the diameter of the pan being 9½ in. The total height of the balance (illustrated in fig. 11) was 13 in. when there was no weight in the pan.

Before levitation, the balance was placed on the floor as nearly under the centre of the table as could be judged by the eye. Fig. 12 indicates the relative positions and dimensions.

The plan of the surface of the table is shown

by the full lines, the position of the legs by the crosses, and the pan of the compression balance by the circle. My position is indicated by the letter A, immediately in front of the table and on the side remote from the medium. There was a clear space of at least 15 in. between the top of the balance and the under surface of the table, and of course no other part of the balance was in contact with any part of the table.

I asked the operators to levitate the table immediately above the balance.

I placed my finger on the pointer whose movement registers the weights in the pan of the balance, and awaited events. Some minutes elapsed, and then the table gave a few heaves at either end. It finally levitated a few inches from the floor, and, after remaining in the air some seconds, dropped. Some minutes passed before the levitation was again successful, and there was a lot of preliminary jerking before it was accomplished, and, as on the previous occasion, it only lasted for the briefest of periods. But during each of these evidently difficult levitations there was no pressure on the balance beneath the table, for the pointer remained stationary in its zero position. Thus

*Fig. 11.*

the operators had accomplished what was required of them, but apparently only after much trouble.

Conclusion. — The table may be levitated and no reaction pressure be put on the pan of the

<■ - - +

- - - 24"

- - -

- ■ ■\

r

+

'

>N

t-J

±..

+

+

A

*Fig. 12.*

balance, but such a levitation seems difficult and not in accordance with the usual method.

In thinking over this result it occurred to me that the operators were making use of that part of the surface underneath the table outside a circle projected upwards from the pan of the balance, and that this was not their normal method of levitation. On inquiring if this was the case, they replied by raps in the affirmative.

Experiment 45: The operators were told not to take any notice of the balance, but to levitate in their normal manner. To find the vertical reaction.

The seance-table and the 14-lb. balance were used.

I placed a piece of dark cloth on the pan of the balance, as experience has shown that reflected rays from any surface upon which psychic force is exerted interfere with the ease and intensity of the phenomena. My finger was pressing lightly on the pointer on the dial of the balance, and in a very few seconds I felt the pointer moving round the dial. It moved completely round at a fairly uniform speed and clicked against the stop, the time occupied being about three seconds. Almost immediately v/ith the completed revolution of the pointer the table rose into the air, swaying slightly backwards and forwards, the pointer remaining all the time against the stop. After some time the table suddenly dropped, and synchronously the pointer flew back round the dial to its normal zero position, nearly catching my finger in the process and nipping it between the pointer and the face of the dial. The maximum reading of the balance was 14 lb., and in order to reach the stop the pointer would have to travel a further distance equivalent to about | lb., so that while levitation was in progress there was a direct downward force upon the pan of the balance of

at least 14½ lb.; how much more than the 14½ lb. might have been registered if the balance had had the capacity to record it, I was unable to say. I did not think, however, that it would have been very much more, as the table seemed to spring up into the air almost immediately after the completion of the revolution of the pointer round the dial. The levitation in this case was strikingly easier than that recorded in Experiment 44. The operators said it was their normal method, and there can be little doubt it is so, at least approximately, because the levitations (there were several of them) were apparently all fairly easy. The degree of difficulty seemed little more than with ordinary levitation without apparatus under the table, the only difference, so far as I could see, lying in the fact that the steadiness was not so pronounced, there being a swaying action during suspension of a character I had not noticed in the ordinary case. I think this swaying action is due to the table being supported on an area of under surface about equal to the area of the pan of the balance, whereas in the ordinary case the supporting force is somewhat more uniform over the surface.

I have said that the pointer took about three or four seconds to get round the dial while levitation was occurring. I examined the phenomenon many times during a period of about a quarter of an hour, and always found that, if the balance was approximately central with respect to the table, the levitation was almost

invariably good and the speed of the pointer round the dial was always about the same; so much so, in fact, was this the case, that I had time to call out that a levitation was about to occur, well before it did occur. It is to be noted that when the pointer completed the circuit and became fast on the stop, the table appeared to spring into the air; that is the only word for it. The important fact is here brought out that the psychic force producing levitation is not applied instantly, but requires an appreciable time (about three to four seconds in this case) to reach the maximum required for levitation.

Conclusions. — (1) As the weight of the table was 10 1 lb., and as the vertical reaction during levitation was always greater than 14½ lb., it does not seem likely that there is any kind of direct stress across anything resembling a fluidic field, unless the weight of the field itself is a considerable factor.

(2) The psychic force producing levitation, judging from the augmentation of reaction, is applied gradually.

(3) At the correct instant the table seems to spring into the air.

(4) The table sways slightly when levitated above the pan of the balance.

(5) The levitating force can be removed instantly.

Experiment 46: Two legs of the table remaining on the floor, the other two rise in the air and move up and down. To find the effect on spring balance placed underneath the table.

The ordinary seance-table and 14-lb. balance were used.

The raised end of the table was jerking quickly up and down in the air. The pointer of the compression balance under the table moved quickly to and fro over the dial in correspondence with the movements of the raised end, the maximum reading being about 7 lb. and the range being about 3 lb.

On another occasion of partial levitation with the same jerking motion the balance was not affected at all, which would seem to show that in that case the psychic force was applied somewhere outside the projection from pan to under surface of table.

During the series of levitations with the 14-lb. compression balance below the table, several points were noticed which I put down under letter headings: —

(A) On two occasions of good levitation the pointer of the balance remained steady for the duration of levitation at about 12 lb. instead of going up against the stop and remaining hard pressed against it. This may have been due to the whole of the reaction not being upon the pan of the balance.

(B) With the table steadily tilted on two legs, the pointer on several trials indicated a downward force of about 7 lb.

(C) Sometimes if there was a hitch in the levitation the pointer would gradually move round to 7 lb. or 8 lb., the table either not rising at all, or tilting just a little, and then the pointer would fly back to zero. The operators would then try again for complete levitation, usually successfully.

(D) I asked on one occasion that the operators should lower the table gently and remove the psychic force gradually, instead of suddenly, as was usually done. The result was that the table descended to the floor slowly, and then the pointer of the balance moved slowly and uniformly back round the dial to zero, taking about six seconds in the process.

(E) When the table was levitated and the pointer against the stop at 14½ lb., I placed my hand and part of my arm in the scale-pan of the balance. I felt no pressure at all, and both the levitation and the reaction were unaffected.

(F) 1 grasped the near edge of the scale-pan, and felt it moving down while the table was being levitated and moving up when the psychic force was being removed.

Experiment 47: This is, strictly speaking, a series of experiments, similar in the main to Experiments 45 and 46, but with this difference, that

a compression balance reading up to 28 lb. was used in place of the one whose maximum reading was 14 lb. In the previous experiments the capacity of the balance was too small to enable the maximum reading to be obtained when the table was levitated, although it was large enough to allow of many interesting points being noted. Therefore, on this occasion I brought to the seance room a balance which read to 28 lb., and I expected that this would be quite large enough to measure the vertical reaction. There was no substantial difference in size or shape of the two balances. During a series of levitations and partial levitations, using this new balance, I found that all the results 1 have mentioned in Experiments 45 and 46 (with the exception of (A), Experiment 46) were completely verified. There was one important misconception, however. When actual levitation occurred, the pointer on the balance did not read a few pounds over 14, as I thought it would, but actually went round the scale and on to the stop, and only just when at the stop were there signs that levitation was imminent. I was much surprised, because I felt almost certain that the vertical reaction was not much greater than 14 lb. However, there was no doubt about the matter, for during four or five levitations the same thing occurred. It would appear that this 'balance was just on the small side for registering the levitation reaction.

Conclusion. — The vertical reaction for the seance-table, weighing 10| lb., is greater than 28 lb., though probably only a little greater.

I had noticed what I thought was a pushing force on the body of the balance during levitation from the direction of the medium. To see if there was in reality a horizontal pushing force as well as a vertical force, I carried out the following experiment.

Experiment 48: To find the horizontal component of the reaction.

The apparatus employed is that shown diagrammatically in fig. 13, and a photograph is also given in fig. 14.

 - -.. 17" =. » - >

To Medium 

*Fig. 13.*

B is the compression balance (reading to 14 lb.) placed on top of an iron carriage C, which runs on ball bearings, and which is so free from friction that a force of  lb. suffices to pull it

along the floor. N is a nail driven into the floor. S is an ordinary Salter tension spring balance reading to 20 lb., tied to the nail N and to the carriage C. T is the levitated table. Between A and N is my approximate position of observation.

I placed a finger of the right hand on the pointer of the tension balance S, and a finger of the left hand on the pointer of the compression balance B. I then asked the operators to levitate the table, when in the usual way the pointer on B gradually moved round to 14½ lb. against the stop, and then the table sprang up into the air. The pointer on the tension balance also simultaneously moved along the scale, and the average of half a dozen levitations gave for it a rough value of about 4 lb. To confirm roughly this reading, I pushed backwards on the compression balance B, and distinctly felt a force of about that magnitude pushing against me.

That the horizontal pushing force on the balance B is not an independent force may be inferred from the following: — Several times during levitation strong upward jerks of the table were given. On all such occasions the pointer on the tension balance S indicated a sudden increase of a pound or two, and when the jerking motion was completed it went back to the normal reading of about 4 lb. steady pull.

Conclusion. — The horizontal component of the reaction when the seance-table of weight 10½ lb.

The Reality of Psychic Phenomena. ]

is levitated above the 14-lb. balance is apparently about 4 lb.; and this component acts directly outwards from the medium.

At a later date I made a further experiment with the object of determining accurately the horizontal component of the reaction.

Eojperiment 49: To endeavour to determine accurately the horizontal component of the reaction.

I rigged up the apparatus as shown in figs. 13 and 14. The balances were, however, different. The compression balance was the one reading to 28 lb. (not to 14 lb.), although its over-all dimensions were about the same; and the tension balance was a much larger one, with larger scale divisions than that used in the previous experiment. It was new, and read up to 20 lb.

During the course of this experiment I proved to my satisfaction that the horizontal and vertical forces are only components of a single force. In three or four cases, with a finger of one hand on the tension pointer and a finger of the other on the compression pointer, 1 felt the absolutely synchronous and proportionate movements of the two: when a hitch in the levitation occurred and one stopped, the other stopped also; when levitation occurred, the tension pointer stopped (or very nearly stopped), the compression pointer being against the stop; they started simultaneously, and I could tell when a levitation was about to occur by the forward movement of the

tension pointer just as well as by that of the compression pointer.

The correct values of the pushing force from medium when the table is steadily levitated above the 28-lb. balance is 5J lb., and this is certainly correct within |; lb. (I followed up the movement of the pointer by a piece of chalk behind it, and this left a sharp straight mark on the scale.) This value of 5½ lb. is the result of many careful readings. A value of about 4 lb. was obtained in Experiment 48, but the spring balance used in that test was not so accurate as that employed in the present one; also, the two compression balances, although very much alike, varied a little in height and other particulars; and again, there may be special reasons why on different evenings the horizontal component of the reaction should vary a little, even though all the apparatus, and its disposition with reference to the medium, remained constant.

Experiment 50: To find the exact value of the vertical downward force on the pan of the balance while the seance-table, weight 10½ lb., was steadily levitated above it.

The 14-lb. and 28-lb. balances being both insufficient to measure the vertical reaction under the levitated seance-table, it was necessary to employ a balance having a still larger capacity. Accordingly, I next chose for this purpose what is known as a parcel balance, because, as its name implies, it is used for weighing parcels. Its

maximum reading was 56 lb., and instead of having a circular scale-pan it had a flat weighing surface of rectangular planished steel 14 in. x 9 in. Its height from base to top, unloaded, was 13j in. A photograph of it in connection with other apparatus is given in fig. 17.

Fig. 15 shows the plan of seance-table and pan of balance. The final experiments with this

*Fig. 15.*

balance were made in conjunction with those for evaluating the horizontal component of the reaction (see Experiments 48 and 49 and figs, 13 and 14).

The parcel balance was placed on top of the little frictionless carriage C, immediately under the table. The total height of pan of balance from floor was then about 15j in. First of all I sat outside the circle and asked for levitation, which after a time was given. An interesting feature of this levitation was the audible click of

the mechanism of both tension and compression balances as they took up their loads. Having therefore seen that the operators could produce the phenomenon under the difficult circumstances named, i.e. with a large balance under the table and a tension balance near medium (see fig. 13), 1 entered the circle and placed myself at the position, with reference to the table, of the letter B (fig. 15), and not A as in Experiment 44, fig. 12, the reason being that the pan of the parcel balance was so large that it was more convenient to put it under the table, so that the dial was facing at right angles to the medium and not directly opposite her. I put the piece of black cloth over the pan and my finger on the pointer of the balance. I had also a piece of chalk for marking the pointer position. I asked for levitation, but, contrary to custom, did not get it. It would seem that my entering the circle had interfered in some way with its psychic equilibrium; and although the operators tried hard and often, as was evidenced by the pointer travelling a good way round the dial, they did not actually succeed in securing a levitation. I suggested to them that I should lower the balance a little, and asked them if that would help. They answered, " Yes." So I took the balance off the carriage and placed it on the floor, which reduced its total height about 2 in. This was immediately efficacious, and levitation soon occurred. I took the value of the downward force on the pan for about half a dozen steady levitations.

Result. — The vertical downward force on pan is 30 lb., and this value is correct to Ij lb. either way, and probably correct to J lb. either way.

The machine was tested for accuracy before the experiment.

The reader must not think that the obtaining of the above result — on which I place much importance — was an easy matter. Because of the size of the balance beneath the table it was difficult, and called for much patience and accuracy on the part of the operators. About four seance hours were occupied altogether in obtaining it and in verifying and reverifying it on different evenings.

Conclusion. — Weight of table.... = 10½ lb.

Vertical downward force on compression balance during steady levitation = 30 lb. Horizontal pushing force on balance

during steady levitation.. = 5½ lb.

The next thing I wished to find out was whether there was a quantitative relation between the height above the floor of the platform from which levitation was effected and the vertical downward reaction on the platform.

Experiment 51: To find the relation between height of platform and vertical downward reaction during levitation.

Fig. 16 gives a diagrammatic sketch of the apparatus employed, whilst a photograph is also shown (fig. 17).

A is the parcel spring balance (see Experiment 50) reading up to 56 lb., with a flat rectangular planished steel pan 1 4 in. x 9 in.

B is a flat iron bar clamped firmly to the pan of the balance.

C is a circular iron rod which can slide up and

*Fig. 16.*

down through a hole in the end of B, and which can be fixed to B by a pin arrangement at intervals in height of 2 in.

D is a flat iron bar fixed at right angles to C.

E is a flat rectangular-shaped piece of wood fixed to the top of D.

The method of carrying out the experiment was as follows: — The apparatus was placed on the floor, to which the base of the balance was

The Eeality of Psychic Phenomena.']

■

n

tightly clamped in order to prevent motion as the psychic reaction was exerted on E. The table was then placed on the floor centrally over the rectangular wooden surface E, with the consequence that the edge of the table came to about the line MM, all that part of the apparatus to the left of MM being below the table. The idea was that the reaction would be exerted on the flat surface E; and as E could be gradually raised, the various reactions for the different heights could be read on the balance A.

Needless to say, the whole apparatus was made exceedingly rigid, and, in spite of the large overhang, when tested in the laboratory was found to be practically accurate.

This experiment is so important, and the chance of performing it occurs so seldom, that I will not apologise for going somewhat minutely into details. In the first test, the rectangular piece of wood E was ordinary soft wood, and measured 12 in. x 9 in. It was fixed to the flat iron bar D by two ordinary screws through holes in D. The apparatus was placed under the table so that the lower surface of D just cleared the floor. I kept my finger firmly on the pointer of the balance A. Levitation was then asked for and obtained. When I was sure of the result for this position, I raised the platform E 2 in. by sliding C up through the hole in the end of B and fixing C in the new position by the pin arrangement provided. Then I obtained levitation for this position. Then the platform

was raised another 2 in., and the experiment proceeded as before. I always took care that E was practically centrally under the table. I usually, for each position, took about three levitations to ensure accuracy. The following is the result of the first experiment. Heights may be considered accurate to  in.

Weight of table... = 10½ lb.

Dimensions of platform E.. = 12 in. x 9 in. Initial no-load reading on balance

due to weight of apparatus. = 8f lb.

Height of platform from floor (in inches).

Net vertical reaction on

platform during levitation (in lbs.).

1½

7h

23i

During one of the last tests at the height of 7½ in., the operators evidently applied the psychic pressure a little off the centre of the platform, for the two screws which held it in position on the flat iron bar D were wrenched out of the wood. Accordingly, further tests could not be proceeded with that evening.

For the next series of tests I substituted for the soft wood a piece of 5-ply wood, and for the screws a couple of -in. bolts.

Experivient 52: Second experiment to find the quantitative relation between height of platform and vertical reaction. Time: some weeks later than the date of Experiment 51.

Before I carried out the second experiment I made a slight alteration on the seance-table, which affected its weight a little. Up to that time the table had possessed two light wooden bars across its width at either end near the floor, their object being, of course, to add rigidity to the legs. In order to show that these were not essential to levitation I had them sawn off.

Weight of table... = 10 lb.

Dimensions of platform (see

fig. 16) = 12 in. x 9 in.

Initial no-load reading on balance

due to weight of apparatus. = 9 lb.

Height of platform from

which levitation is effected

(in inches).

Net vertical reaction on platform during levitation (in pounds).

Test A.

Test B.

f

36½

The method of carrying out the two tests A

and B was as follows: — I first did test A, commencing with the platform at its nearest distance to the floor and taking either two or three levitations for each height, so as to obtain the results as accm-ately as possible. When I had worked through all the heights in this way, I went right through them again from bottom to top (test B). It will be observed that there is a variation of a few pounds in some of the heavier readings between the two sets.

During the course of the seance, over twenty separate levitations were given by the operators.

I wish to emphasise a particular point with regard to this experiment — a point which I think will eventually prove to be of great importance in the elucidation of the mystery of psychic force. It is this: At the greater heights — those in which the reactions are heavy — the downward vertical force on the platform did not become steady (as might have been expected) as soon as levitation was effected. On the contrary, the force in all cases continued to increase for a couple of seconds or so after levitation. From 5 lb. to 8 lb. is my estimate of the amount of downward force added after levitation was complete, and before the pointer on the balance ceased moving, which it, however, eventually did in all cases. The readings given above represent the final steady values.

And now a word or two on the interpretation of the results of Experiments 51 and 52. The three tests, although they do not give identical

results for the different heights, are, however, fairly consistent. They all show —

(1) That on the floor, and for two or three inches above it, there is no reaction (thus verifying the results of Experiment 38).

O' Height of platform from floor.

*Fig. 18.*

(2) A very slight reaction is just noticeable at a height of three inches from the floor.

(3) The reaction in all three cases suddenly increases. For instance, in Experiment 51, from inch 5½ to inch 7½> it changes from 3 lb. to 23½ lb.; in Experiment 52, test A, from inch 3 to inch 5, it changes from f lb. to 22 lb.; in test B, from inch 3 to inch 5, from f lb. to 26 lb.

(4) After the sudden increase of reaction pressure referred to in (3), the rate of increase of pressure with height greatly diminishes.

The graph, fig. 18, shows roughly how the reaction varies. There seems first to be a gradual rise of pressure (A), then a sudden rise (B), and then a slower and fairly uniform increase (C).

Experiment 53: To find the vertical component of the reaction when a small stool is levitated immediately above a compression balance.

I placed the drawing-board (covered with a piece of rough dark carpet) on top of the 56-lb. parcel balance (see Experiment 50), and the stool (table 4, p. 38) on top of the board, and asked for levitation.

Fig. 19 indicates the arrangement. This levitation was evidently a most difficult one for the operators; in fact, I think it was the most difficult one I have come across, not even excepting that of the seance table over the platform of the weighing-machine (see Experiment 41). It was attempted at least a dozen times before being finally successful. What usually happened was that the pointer on the balance would move round to 20 lb. or so, and then, just when levitation was evidently about to occur, the little stool would topple over, when I would have to place it upright again. It seemed to me that something was trying to get under the stool, but.

owing to the small amount of space available, and to the height of the platform, was unsuccessful. At length, however, just when I was about to give up the experiment, even in spite of the desire of the operators, who told me by

->- Levitated Stool. Weight, 21b. 12o2.

i

- Drawing Board, weight, 5*2 lb.

-> Pointer reading 24i4lb.

*Fig. 19.*

raps to hold on, the stool went up about 8 in. into the air and remained there quite steady for from 8 to 10 seconds. Two such levitations gave for the vertical downward force on the balance 24 lb., and two others gave 24½ lb. The weight of the board (with carpet) was 5½ lb., so that the vertical downward force on the balance while the stool was steadily levitated was 24½

(the average) — 5½- = 18f lb., or 6-8 times the weight of the stool.

In order to make sure that this value of ISf lb. was not fictitious, during several of the unsuccessful attempts at levitation referred to above I grasped the edge of the drawing-board and lifted it a little. I found, as I anticipated, that my estimate of the downward force on the board agreed roughly with the reading on the balance.

Experiment 54: The work done in the previous tests gave me a fairly accurate idea as to what was happening below the table. In order to see if I could deduce what exactly would happen under certain conditions, I arranged an experiment in which the vertical reaction on the compression balance was indicated by the ringing of an electric bell.

Appaiatus. —

{a) The seance-table, weight 10 lb.

(6) A compression balance reading to 28 lb.

(c) An electric bell and battery with about

20 ft. of insulated wire.

(d) A paper-clip made of metal, such as is

used to hold numbers of sheets of

paper together.

Method. — I took the little weighing-machine

or balance, and, having scraped the insulation off

the end of one of the electric-bell wires, attached

the wire to the pointer of the balance. This was

done by taking out the screw at the centre, twisting the end of the wire round it, and then screwing it back securely in place. The end of the other electric-bell wire was fastened securely to the paper-clip. The clip itself was fixed over the edge of the dial, and was insulated from it by

Fig, 20.

pieces of brown paper being placed between it and the surface of the dial.

In fig. 20, P is the pan of the balance, D the dial, B the pointer, WW the wires going to the electric bell, and C the clip. The clip was fixed about the 20-lb. mark on the dial. The idea of the whole thing was that when the pointer should turn round sufficiently to come into contact with the clip, electric contact would be made and

the bell would ring. With the seance-table of weight 10 lb., the actual vertical reaction was greater than 20 lb. (see Experiment 50), but I set the clip at 20 lb. so as to make sure of good mechanical contact.

I placed the balance on the floor centrally under the table, and the bell and battery on the mantelpiece, letting the wires run along the floor. There was a clear space of at least 15 in. between pan of balance and under surface of table. I placed a piece of rough dark cloth on the pan. I expected to find the following results during levitation of the table over the balance: —

(1) The bell would start ringing a second or two before levitation actually took place.

(2) During levitation the bell would probably ring continuously.

(3) The varying height of the levitation would probably make no diflerence to the ringing of the bell.

As a matter of fact, when levitation was in progress the above three results were exactly what were obtained.

I recommend an experimenter, if he has a levitating medium at hand, to carry out this experiment. It is simple and also effective, for the observer can take a stroll round the circle while it is going on, can see the table levitated, can hear the bell ringing, and can see that all hands are held in chain order and that feet are on the floor. He can also ask the members of the circle

to hold their hands up to the level of their heads, and make other tests that occur to him.

Experiment 55: To discover what would happen when, the medium having been placed on weighing-machine, and a compression balance having been placed under the table, the table levitated.

Fig. 21 shows the arrangement. M is the medium seated on the weighing-machine, T is

*Fig. 21.*

the levitated table, and B is the compression balance.

I first of all balanced exactly the weight of medium, chair, and drawing-board (it was 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz.), and allowed the steelyard to rest lightly on the bottom stop. Then 1 placed the 14-lb. compression balance (see Experiment 44) under the table and asked for levitation. I kept my finger tightly on the pointer of the balance. Unfortunately, this experiment is in nowise complete, and I never had an opportunity of

repeating it (though I may hope for one in the future), and the result obtained, while accurate so far as it goes, is not exact as regards figures. During levitation the pointer of the compression balance was hard up against the stop. I asked the operators to drop the table suddenly, which they did, and the pointer on the compression balance immediately flew back round the dial to zero. Four seconds afterwards the click of the steelyard of the weighing-machine was heard as it fell on the bottom stop; that is to say, while the table was levitated there was a vertical reaction on the compression balance, and also an increased weight on the medium.

The four seconds was the computation from three similar tests, and was made by me and also by an independent observer. This time lag has, I think, no significance, being due solely to the inertia of the moving parts of the weighingmachine.

How much extra weight was on the medium while the table was in the air above the balance I am unable to say; probably, as I shall show later on, not an amount equal to the weight of the table.

Experiment 56: Crackling sound in the wood of surface of table during levitation.

During one of the tests mentioned in this chapter, I heard a sort of crackling sound in the wood of the under surface of the table just when levitation was commencing, as though

the fibres were being subjected to stress — to a stress which was pushing them apart from one another, as it were. I have only heard this particular kind of sound on two occasions.

Experiment 57: Thud under table at commencement of levitation.

During one of the levitations 1 heard a soft thud under the centre of the top of the table as if a column of some softish substance had been pushed on it. I remarked on this to the members of the circle, and on the very next levitation I again heard the same light thud. It would seem that the operators had heard what I had said and had repeated the performance for my benefit. These were the only occasions on which I ever heard the noise. Possibly it was the impact of the levitating force delivered a little more heavily than usual.

Chapter VIII — Completion Of The Experiments On Levitation

Experiment 58: The effect of placing a charged electroscope under the levitated table.

I took an electroscope of the disc type, charged it, and placed it nearly centrally under the steadily levitated table, allowing it to remain there for about half a minute. Result: no effect on the electroscope, the leaves remaining as far apart as before.

The investigation of the space between the medium and the levitated table is a most important matter. Unfortunately, this region is a most difficult place in which to experiment, for the placing of apparatus within it, or rather within the vital part of it, immediately breaks down the line of communication; and as this line, or these lines, seem difficult to form, and once broken cause the cessation of phenomena for quite a long period of time, the experimenter has to be careful what he is doing. Also the unscientific meddlingwith this parL of space is apt to be pBysically injurious to the medium.

Experiment 59: Investigation of the space between the medium and the table jerking about on the floor.

Apparatus. — I had constructed a very delicate electric contact, consisting of two pieces of flat clock spring, separated from each other by a distance of about  in. A piece of light cardboard about 3 in. X 3½ in. was hinged at its top end to a flat piece of wood, and rested on the top spring. The con- j| JW tact was placed in an electric-bell circuit, and it was so adjusted that breathing upon it strongly was sufficient to make the bell ring.

In fig. 22, W is the flat piece of wood; C the piece of cardboard hinged at A; S S the two pieces of flat spring the coming into contact of which rang the electric bell (not shown).

The table was jerking about on the floor. I moved the con- fig. 22. tact-maker here and there in the air in front of the medium, keeping the surface of the cardboard nearest to her and roughly parallel to her body and perpendicular to any stress line likely to come from her. At a certain spot about 2 ft. above the floor the bell rang, and simultaneously the table stopped its movements along the floor.

7>S.S.

Eooperiment 60: Investigation of space between medium and levitated table.

Appaiatus. — Same as in Experiment 59.

I asked for levitation of the seance-table, and while it was in progress I moved the contactmaker about in front of the medium as in the previous test. At practically the same spot the bell rang again and the table instantly dropped. The operators would not allow me to proceed with the experiment. They affirmed, by means of raps, that the contact-maker was in the stressline from medium to table.

Experiments 59 and 60 show two things very plainly: (1) that the contact-maker was cutting across a link connecting medium to table, and (2) along this link there was mechanical pressure 'rom medium to table.

I append some remarks I made in Light when describing the above experiments: —

" I have some reason to believe that the establishing of these stress-lines (the links) is for the operators a difficult process, and that once formed they remain more or less in situ for the duration of the stance. I think they may be likened to tunnels somewhat laboriously cut through resisting material. Their basis seems to be physical, for I have actually felt the motion of material particles near the ankles (and proceeding outwards from them) of the medium (the stress-lines seem to commence sometimes at the wrists and ankles of my medium), and I have

noticed during the rapping that when my hand interferes with the particle flow — which seems to correspond with a stress-line — the rapping has ceased for quite a long time and could seemingly only be restarted with difficulty. In other words, the path had been obliterated. I do not think the particles of matter (for such I am assuming them to be) are the cause of the pressure which lifts the table. I think they are the connecting links which allo\, the psychic pressure to be transmitted, much in the manner that a wire is the path which enables electricity to flow."

Experiment 61: Reaction on the floor below levitated table.

To verify the results of previous experiments which showed that when the seance-table was levitated above the floor there was no reaction on the floor, I took advantage of the delicate contact-maker used in Experiment 59. Having placed it on the floor under the table, I asked for levitation. During the preliminary jerkings, etc., and also during levitation, the bell did not ring — showing, as was expected, that there was no pressure on the floor.

Experiment 62: Condition of the medium during levitation.

During many of the levitations mentioned in the previous experiments I examined the

medium. Her arms, whether held by the sitters on either side of her, or resting on lier knees, were always stiff, i.e. the muscles seemed to be under great stress, making the arms even sometimes iron-like in their rigidity. Especially was this rigidity noticeable at the bend of the arm, though right from shoulder to wrist the amount of the muscular tension was surprising. While the stool was steadily levitated at the abnormal height of 4 feet, her arms were excessively stiff, even stiffer than when the seance-table, nearly four times as heavy, was suspended. The medium herself says that high levitations affect her muscular system most. She says the muscular rigidity is not confined to her arms but occurs all over her body, although not to the same extent.

Of late months I am inclined to think that a change has been occurring. I do not think her arms are at present so rigid during levitation as they once were. Perhaps this is due to the reaction upon her becoming more diffused.

JSrperiment 63: Possible weight of structure used to levitate the table.

I said to the operators, " I wish you to put the 'power' you use for levitating the table under the table, but not to levitate it or act on it in any way." I repeated the request slowly several times. They said they thoroughly understood what I required. 1 had previously balanced the

weight of medium (who was sitting on the weighing-machine), chair, and drawing-board (see Experiments in Chapter III.). The combined weight was 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz. I watched the machine carefully. The medium's weight began to decrease, slowly and a little spasmodically, and it became fairly steady again at 8 st. 10 lb., though there were fluxes below this. Hence, according to the operators, the weight of the field or structure required for levitation of the seance-table was about 14 lb. or 15 lb. But, as they may have been doubtful of my meaning — though they did not appear to be so, — I do not propose to pay much attention to this result.

Experime7it 64: Evidence of some sort of preparation on the part of the operators just previous to levitation.

The observing of many levitation experiments has shown me that the operators have to make a preparation for the phenomenon. The following test, which has occurred often, will enable the reader to understand what I mean. The pan of the 28-lb. compression balance (used in some of the experiments already described) was not fixed tightly on the stem of the balance, but was a loose fit upon it.

In fig. 23 the pan P is shown fitting loosely over the circular socket A, from which it can be removed by simply raising it up. The

consequence of the loose fit is that if the pan is Hghtly shaken it rattles. When I placed this balance below the table and asked for levitation, what usually happened was that from half a minute to a minute before levitation the pan M'ould rattle, although of course no one was touching it. On these occasions no pressure was registered on the balance. So regularly was

*Fig. 23.*

this the case with levitation over this particular balance, that I had to come to the conclusion that what was happening was that the operators were laying some kind of a line, structure, substratum— call it what you will — from the medium to the pan of the balance, and that this was an essential and necessary preliminary to the accomplishment of the phenomenon.

The following notes are taken from one of my articles in Light on this same matter, and deal in a general way with other balances than

the one mentioned above — i.e. balances in which the pan was rigidly fixed: —

"Suppose I am working at compressionbalance experiments below the table. At the conclusion of each test I usually bring a fairly strong light right into the centre of the circle, in order thoroughly to examine instruments and so on. When I do this, the next levitation required does not commence at once, but may take a few minutes. Before it commences I become conscious that preparations are being made for it, by a kind of shock being given to the apparatus, a shock which does not produce pressure. Perhaps a quarter or half a minute later levitation occurs. It would seem that a line was being made, so to speak, and that the phenomenon could not ensue until it was properly in position. Witness the thud of the supposed column, well before levitation (see Experiment 57). If I do not bring a white light into the circle, levitations follow one another rapidly, for the structure seems not to be disturbed and therefore does not require to be renewed or partially renewed."

Experivient Q5: The presence of actual matter below the levitated table.

On one occasion, while the table was levitated (it was a difficult case of the phenomenon over a compression balance) I placed my hand under it near the top. As in previous tests, I felt no

sense of pressure whatever, but I did feel a clammy, cold, almost oily sensation — in fact, an indescribable sensation, as though the air there were mixed with particles of dead and disagreeable matter. Perhaps the best word to describe the feeling is "reptilian." I have felt the same substance often — and I think it is a substance — in the vicinity of the medium, but there it has appeared to me to be moving outwards from her. Once felt, the experimenter always recognises it again. This was the only occasion on which I have felt it under the levitated table, though perhaps it is always there, but not usually in such an intense form. Its presence under the table and also in the vicinity of the medium shows that it has something to do with the levitation; and in short I think there can be little doubt that it is actual matter temporarily taken from the medium's body and put back at the end of the seance, and that it is the basic principle underlying the transmission of psychic force.

The table soon dropped when I moved my hand to and fro in amongst this psychic stuiF.

Experiment QQ: To find how much weight is permanently lost by each sitter during the seance.

I took the weight of each sitter at the beginning and the end of the seance, which lasted for about an hour and a half. The following are the results: —

Names of sitters.

Weight before seance.

Weight after seance.

Miss Kathleen Goligher (medium)

Mr Goligher....

Miss Anna Goligher.

Miss Lily Goligher.

Mrs Morrison....

Mr Morrison....

8 St. 6 lb. 6 oz. 8,, 13,, 8,, 7„ 1 „ 4 „ 5,, 7,, 4,, 7,, 5,, 12,, 9„ 9 „ 12 „

8 St. 6 lb. 4 oz.

8,, 13 „ 8 „ 7,, 1,, 2 „ 5,, 7,, 2 „ 7,, 5 „ 6,,

9,, 9,, 11,,

Dr Crawford....

10 „ 9,, 14 „

10,, 9,, 8,,

At the close of the seance, and just before the re-weighing, Mr Morrison in a moment of forgetfulness drank half a glass of water. This was weighed and the amount subtracted from his final weight, which may, however, be an ounce or two out. One of the members of the circle, Master Sam Goligher, was absent on holiday.

Most careful weighings were made. All precautions were taken that nobody should possess a handkerchief, say, at the conclusion of the sitting who did not possess it at the beginning.

It will be seen that I have included myself in the weighings, although I was not a member of the circle but was moving in and out of it all the time attending to the experimental work on hand.

When we study this result we see that there is an almost general permanent loss of weight, for, with the exception of one sitter, everybody lost a little. In no case does it amount to much more than a few ounces. It will be noted with interest that the medium lost only two ounces.

The greatest sufferers seem to have been Mrs Morrison and myself, who both lost six ounces, the maximum in any individual case.

Total weight of sitters,

including myself,

before seance.

Total weight of sitters,

including myself,

after seance.

Total loss of

weight at end

of seance.

57 St. 11 lb. 12 oz.

57 St. 10 lb. 9 oz.

1 lb. 3 oz.

Now, the question arises with regard to this experiment how far this permanent loss of weight of 19 oz. is due to phenomenal activities and how far to natural causes. The sitting was held on a very warm evening (temperature about 70° F.), and the room was somewhat small. There was a considerable amount of phenomena.

As to the losses of weight due to natural causes I am not able to speak. Personally, while without expert knowledge on the subject, I would not have thought there could have been such a loss by natural causes alone, even on a warm summer evening in a small room.

The next question that arises is regarding my own loss of weight. I was not a member of the circle. I was moving about the room practically all the time, in and out of the circle, attending to the experimental work on hand. Now, were the entities taking matter from me? That is, if people other than the regular sitters are in the room, altogether outside the chain of the circle, can the operators abstract matter from them for

the production of psychic energy? Or is the abstraction confined to members of the circle? It looks as though the former is the case.

It is not so much a question as to whether the members of the circle are used in some way by the operating entities, as to whether matter is permanently extracted from the bodies of the members. That the members of the circle are of some use may easily be observed. Occasionally when I have experimented with a member short I think I have noticed that phenomena were not so powerful or prolonged. But a surer sign that the members of the circle are used is the tremendous spasmodic jerk that goes round the whole circle just previous to a difficult levitation being attempted by the operators, especially when psychic energy has been somewhat wanting and there does not seem to be any reservoir of it to draw upon, so to speak. At such a time I have asked the operators to produce levitation. In a few seconds the members would be overtaken with a severe spasmodic jerk which seemed to travel right round the circle. Then perhaps a quarter of a minute afterwards levitation would occur. I have noticed this too often to be deceived about it.

During the opening of a stance, say for the first quarter of an hour, the bodies of the sitters are usually subjected to intermittent muscular jerking. After that period of time this ceases altogether, or only takes place occasionally. It seems to me that the meaning of the process is

that something is being loosened from the bodies of the members of the circle — a something which then circulates round the sitters either through their bodies or in space immediately surrounding their bodies.

Experiment 67: An X-ray fluorescent screen (platino-cyanide of barium) placed below levitated table.

While the table was steadily levitated, I placed an X-ray fluorescent screen below it and in space surrounding it (the room was darkened for the purpose.)

Result. — There was no sign of fluorescence.

Chapter IX — A Cantilever Theory For Levitation

I PROPOSE in this chapter to bring forward a theory for levitation based chiefly on the results of the sixty-seven experiments already described. Let us first of all consider for a little the results of Experiment 50. It will be remembered that the seance-table was steadily levitated over a compression balance, and that a large vertical downward force was noted; experiment also showed that there was a pushing force from the medium. The values, as the result of much careful experimenting, were as follows: —

Weight of seance-table... = 10½ lb. Vertical downward force on compression balance during levitation. = 30 lb. Horizontal pushing force from medium = 5½ lb.

Besides obtaining the above values, I also took the distance of medium from table, the height of the top of her head from the floor, distance of her knees from the table, and so on. I then set out a scale diagram of her position, and the positions of table and of compression

balance. The first point in the inquiry was to see if the levitation of the table could be explained by any system of two, three, or even four forces in equilibrium, taking the three known quantities enumerated above derived from experiment. The result, however, was failure. No system of simple statics will ex-Fig. 24.

plain the phenomenon — at any rate, so far as I can see.

When I had convinced myself of this, I had to look around for another theory, and the one that seemed to me most likely was the " beam " theory, and in particular the " cantilever."

A cantilever is a beam firmly fixed at one end and free at the other.

In fig. 24, A is the cantilever firmly built into the wall K. A weight W is shown suspended from the free end. Let us suppose the medium

takes the place of the wall and that the cantilever projects from her in the manner shown, and that the table during levitation takes the place of the weight W. As to the structure of this psychic cantilever I am not at present concerned, and am only dealing with the idea that a cantilever — resembling in its qualities a rigid beam — is in reality present. I propose to see, in effect, if the theory of the cantilever explains the mechanics of the levitated table.

