I wish to state here what a clairvoyante saw at the circle — a clairvoyante who has many claims to recognition, — as she described it to me. She says that under the table, close to the under surface and extending down for a little way, she saw a whitish vapoury substance, somewhat like smoke, and when the table was levitated this substance seemed to increase in density, i.e. in whiteness. When a visitor to the circle sat on the table in order that it should tilt and throw him off, she saw this substance below the table get very white and dense just previous to the movement which actually tilted the table. So much so, in fact, was she able to see the variation in the density and whiteness of the substance, and its relation to the magnitude of the force applied, that she was able to call out that a movement was about to occur before it actually occurred, by noticing the density and opacity increasing. She says that this whitish substance was only to be seen under the top of

the table, and did not reach to the floor. Also, a great band of it came from the left side of the medium with a kind of rotary motion, and was continuous with that under the table. From all the other sitters a very thin band, like a ribbon, also came, and was continuous with the mass under the table. Nowhere did any of these bands, the comparatively huge one from the medium, or the thin and paltry ones from the sitters, touch the floor. The clairvoyante says she also saw various spirit forms and spirit hands manipulating the psychic stuff; but we may leave that out of consideration and confine our attention to what is mentioned above.

The remarkable fact is plain that the clairvoyante's description tallies in an extraordinary way with my deductions from the experiments. In the first place, she says there was none of the white filmy stuff on or near the floor beneath the levitated table. Experiments have absolutely convinced me that there is no psychic pressure on the floor or on a platform placed less than 3 in. above the floor, and that the psychic reaction gradually increases with the height of the platform. In the second place, she says the different degrees of apparent density of the substance enabled her roughly to gauge the magnitude of the psychic force. Now, it is absolutely certain that the pressure below the table in the act of levitation is applied gradually, and only reaches a maximum after five or six seconds, which gave me time to call out that a levitation was about

to occur, well before it did actually occur. In the third place, the great bulk of the whitish substance was seen proceeding from the medium, but there was also a thin band from each sitter. Now, experiment shows that when the table is levitated, about 97 per cent, of the reaction is upon the medium; that on one of the other sitters there is also a small but nevertheless perceptible reaction. The coincidence, to say the least of it, is thought-provoking. The clairvoyante says she saw the whitish substance issuing from the left side of the medium. As a matter of fact, the medium, during the course of her development, has occasionally been troubled with a soreness in her left side, which may not unreasonably be supposed to be due to the large quantity of psychic stuff which may issue thence during levitation.

If we may take the vision of the clairvoyante as accurate, it would appear that a whitish substance is present under the top part of the levitated table, the whiteness or density increasing with the magnitude of the psychic force applied. This substance is not visible to normal vision, for often I have looked right below levitated tables from one side of the circle to the other, and have seen nothing. Nevertheless, for all that, as already mentioned, something in the nature of a cold, clammy substance appears to be there. Therefore it is probably this substance that the clairvoyante, with her abnormal perception, really saw. In this connection it is well to

remember that the photograph (Experiment 87) shows a white, filmy, translucent substance, apparently projected from the body of one of the sitters, and that this substance also has different degrees of density. Possibly the stuff shown in the photograph, the stuff the clairvoyante saw, and the stuff I felt under the table and near the ankles of the medium are one and the same. At any rate, if the clairvoyante really saw this stuff, it is reasonable to believe that the different degrees of density she observed in it are really varying degrees of density of the stuff itself; that is to say, that the magnitude of the applied psychic force is somewhat directly proportional to the density of the matter taken from the medium. From which we arrive at the inference: — the magnitude of the psychic force is directly proportional to the density of the matter in the stress line from medium to table.

The stiffness of the levitating cantilever would then be more or less proportional to the density of the matter packed into or among the threads or fibres issuing from the medium.

That some kind of a thread-like base or substratum is used as a foundation for the phenomena at the circle is also inferentially deduced from the following, which, however, I have not personally observed. Mr Morrison, whose place in the circle is on the right-hand side of the medium, and who holds her right hand throughout the seance (except on special

occasions when hands are on knees), and who has been sitting once a week on an average for a period of over three years, informs me that occasionally, when psychic energy has been weak, he has felt a loose kind of flabby projection striking him on the knee or other part of the body. It is reasonable to suppose that this is a rapping rod which the operators have been unable to make rigid through lack of psychic energy. Mr Morrison being the director of the circle, the operators often gently touch him when they desire to attract his attention to something that is hindering phenomena; usually their touch is quite firm, but on a few occasions, as mentioned, he has felt the loose, baggy projection flapping against him.

The effect of light is, generally speaking, so well known on the production of physical phenomena, that I do not intend to say much about it. The obvious fact is that the less light the more intense the phenomena. I have come to the conclusion that light affects the rigidity of the rapping rods, i.e. these rods cannot be made stiff if strong light is playing upon them. As a case in point, I would refer the reader to p. 195, where it is shown that with too much light, or with badly regulated light, the raps were not sharp and distinct as they should be, but were soft and dull as though the end of the rod itself were soft; in other words, the rigidity of the rod was affected. I do not think that the light affects the substratum fibres so much as

the matter that is packed into them to stiffen them (if there is anything in the fibre theory); i.e. I think that the cold, clammy matter above mentioned cannot exist in the presence of strong light. Possibly it is of complicated chemical structure, belonging to the nervous elements of the body, and the action of light causes molecular breakdown. There is the more reason to suppose that something like this takes place inasmuch as it is found by experience that light of long wave-length, i.e. red light, is least deleterious.

Of course, in the seance room the factors of reflection, refraction, and absorption of the light used have to be taken into consideration. In this regard I will mention a rather curious case which occurred at one of my seances. As already mentioned, I used at my experimental circles an ordinary flame gas-jet enclosed in a metal lantern, two sides of the lantern being replaced by rectangular pieces of red glass which could slide up and down in grooves. The intensity of the red light thus produced could be considerably varied by means of an ordinary gas tap. For most of the seances this lamp was fixed to the mantelpiece; for a late seance it was taken from the mantelpiece and fixed a foot higher up the wall, with the idea of leaving the floor a little more in shadow and of giving greater luminosity in the higher parts of the room. The seance commenced, but, as after twenty minutes or so very little seemed to be

doing — a most unusual occurrence, — I began to wonder what was the matter. Shortly afterwards, by means of raps, the operators spelt out the following: —

" Could you place the lamp lower down? " After a lot of trouble, we succeeded in fixing the lamp in its original position on the mantelpiece, when phenomena of great intensity commenced. I could see practically no difference in the degree of visibility for the two positions. I think, however, that in its higher position light was being reflected from the whitewashed roof to the floor, and this is a matter psychic investigators should bear in mind. I have noticed, also, that the operators find difficulty in applying psychic force to polished bodies, and that they prefer a rough, darkish surface. But this, of course, may have nothing to do with the light, and may be due to the fact that the adhesive qualities of the rod-projection are best suited to rough surfaces.

The question is often asked: Why do you not apply to the operators themselves for the solution of the problems relating to the phenomena? In fact, this question was raised during the running of my series of articles in Light, and is a perfectly legitimate one. Moreover, I was interested in it during the course of all my work, and always had it in mind; indeed, the reader of this book will find that here and there I have asked questions of the operators as to modes of procedure, as to how things

were done, and so on, and that I have either acted on the suggestions given or have examined any of the statements made.

In the first place, the operators themselves do not seem to know much about the scientific aspect of the phenomena they produce. If I may hazard an opinion, I would say that they are only aware of the broad outlines of what they are doing, just as we are, for instance, when we send an electric current along a wire. At any rate, I am convinced that the operators know next to nothing of force magnitudes and reactions. Their idea as to the prime cause of the phenomena is " power." For instance, when I inquired how a certain reaction effect was obtained, they spelt out by raps the word "power." That is to say, they have no exact scientific knowledge of details. They are like the workman who knows by experience what depth of cut to take on a job in the lathe, at what speed to run the machine, etc., but who has little idea of the cutting force exerted by the edge of the tool, or of the exact horse-power necessary to drive the machine. Nevertheless, as might be supposed, if some small material thing is interfering with their results they are quick enough to rap out a request that it be rectified, just as a workman would know to sharpen his tool if its cutting quality was defective. Thus on one occasion they asked that a piece of cloth should be placed on the drawing-board, on another that the light should

be placed nearer the floor, and on another that one of the sitters should alter position. Small things like these, which interfere with the intensity of their phenomena, they seem to understand; but as to what form of energy it is they utilise to lift the table or cause the rap they seem to know little.

What I have said above refers to communications received by raps when Miss Goligher was perfectly normal, as she always is at all experimental circles. Occasionally, however, when I have desired it, she has gone into trance, not for physical phenomena, but to allow me to talk to the entities purporting to speak through her. One of these, who says he was a medical man while on earth, and whose function at the circle is to look after the health of the medium during phenomena, has told me (a little obscurely, it is true) that there are two kinds of substance taken from the members of the circle and used in the production of phenomena. One of these is taken in comparatively large quantities from medium and sitters, and is all, or nearly all, returned to them at the close of the seance. The other is taken in minute quantities, and can only be obtained from the medium, and this stuff cannot be returned to her because when it is used for phenomenal purposes its structure is broken up. It consists of the most vital material in the medium's body — stuff from the interior of her nerve cells, — and only the

most minute quantity can be removed without injury to the medium. I give his statement, of course, only as a matter of interest.

One other point. The operators are always strongly affirmative, strongly negative, or strongly doubtful in replies to questions. I have never known them say they could do something and then fail to do it; likewise, if they say they cannot do a thing, it will not be done; if they mention the matter as doubtful, they try to accomplish it, usually successfully. So also, in answer to questions with regard to the production of the phenomena, I have always found them eager to tell me anything they can; and if they affirm any one of my theories is right, wrong, or doubtful, I have always found, by deduction from the experiments themselves, or by later experiments, that it was as they said. I have never known them volunteer information (with the exception of the case of the " doctor " referred to above), but they are always willing strongly to affirm or strongly to deny the general sense of my conclusions. In addition, I have sometimes thought they have brought to my attention in roundabout ways phases of an experiment I should otherwise have overlooked.

Besides the main processes resulting in levitation, rapping, etc., there are various preliminary operations taking place at the circle which I have not studied in any very definite way, but which, nevertheless, are of great interest. I will conclude by saying a few words about them.

For the first half-hour or so after the opening of the seance I have found it advisable that the members of the circle should clasp hands in chain order, i.e. the hands of each person should be held by the hands of the persons on either side of him. After the expiration of that time it is usually immaterial whether hands are kept clasped, or whether each sitter places his hands on his knees. I say this is usually the case, but it is not always so. It is only true when the seance has been a good one, with phenomena occurring plentifully. If phenomena have been weak, the unclasping of hands and the placing of them on the knees is usually fatal to further manifestations unless the chain order is resumed.

All this points to the fact that at a normally good seance the sitting, generally speaking, may be divided into two parts — a part which is more or less unstable, where the operators are chiefly engaged in preparatory work, and a part where psychic affairs have reached a state of equilibrium. I have often watched the two processes — the stage of preliminary operations and the stage of balance.

To my mind, the two processes suggest physical analogies which are helpful. Let us think of a large tank situated well above the ground level, which has to be filled with water from the ground by means of several varieties of steam pumps. The sitters may be likened to the steam pumps, and their various psychic capacities and conditions may be considered

to resemble various classes and designs in the pumps. The filling of the water tank is equivalent to producing a region of psychic pressure in the neighbourhood of the medium. I find that the psychic tank takes about half an hour to fill at the Goligher circle. Very seldom is it completely filled; when it is, there results a wonderful phenomenal sitting. At seances where the accumulated amount of psychic energy is small — where the tank is only a quarter filled, say — the psychic pumps have to be kept more or less continually going. The spasmodic jerking seen in the bodies of the sitters is in effect the visible working of the psychic pumps.

Let us suppose that the stance is a good one, and that it is possible for the members of the circle to place hands on knees and thus become physically isolated from one another. In that case the stage of psychic equilibrium has been reached — the psychic tank has been filled, — and a reservoir of psychic energy has been accumulated in the neighbourhood of the medium, or within the body of the medium, from which the operators can draw to produce phenomena. Now, what kind of potential energy is it? Is it chemical, pressure, electrical, heat energy, or indeed some form quite unknown to us? Personally— and now the reader must remember I am again in the region of hypothesis, though of hypothesis derived from a considerable amount of observation — I am inclined to think it is a

form of chemical energy associated with the human nervous system. The opportunities for research here are unlimited. At any rate, I think there can be little doubt that this psychic energy is associated with particles of matter. For instance, a cold wind is often apparent at the commencement of a seance — a cold wind which often disappears after a time. I think it probable that this cold effect is due to material evaporation from the bodies of the sitters; not to a large or even appreciable amount of evaporation, but nevertheless to the evaporation of definite particles of matter. The reservoir of psychic energy accumulated presumably near the medium does not appreciably affect her weight. I have weighed her before the seance, and then again when the seance has been in operation for an hour or so, with psychic equilibrium well established, but I found no appreciable difference in the two results. In fact, it would appear that the accumulated psychic energy is only associated with a small and perhaps an inappreciable amount of matter. For all that, of course, it may have considerable magnitude.

In order that we may form some kind of mental picture of what occurs to medium and sitters, I offer the following hypothesis. It is very imperfect, but may be useful in the meantime in default of anything better: —

Sitters clasp hands. Spasmodic jerking occurs. A cold wind is sometimes felt in the wrists and

hands. After half an hour or so the jerking ceases or becomes less pronounced.

Interpretation. — Operators are acting on the brains of the sitters and thence on their nervous systems. Small particles, it may even be molecules, are driven off the nervous system, out through the bodies of sitters at wrists, hands, fingers, or elsewhere. These small particles, now free, have a considerable amount of latent energy inherent in them, an energy which can react on any human nervous system with which they come into contact. This stream of energised particles flows round the circle, probably partly through the bodies of the sitters, and probably partly on the periphery of their bodies. The stream, by gradual augmentation from the sitters, reaches the medium at a high degree of " tension," energises her, receives increment from her, traverses the circle again, and so on. Finally, when the "tension" is sufficiently great, the circulating process ceases, and the energised particles collect on or are attached to the nervous system of the medium, who has henceforth a reservoir from which to draw. The operators having now a good supply of the right kind of energy at their disposal, viz. nerve energy, can act upon the body of the medium, who is so constituted that gross matter from her body can, by means of the nervous tension applied to it, be actually temporarily detached from its usual position and projected into the seance room.

List of Experiments

1. Phonograph record of raps
2. Reaction on medium
3. Reaction on medium
4. Reaction on medium
5. Reaction on sitter
6. Reaction on medium
7. Reaction on medium
8. Reaction on medium
9. Table moving along floor
10. Various movements of table
11. Observation of weighing-machine
12. Table tilted on two legs
13. Table pulled towards medium
14. Table pushed from medium
15. Calculation of levitating pressure
16. Calculation of levitating pressure
17. Muscular force on table
18. Two resistances for table
19. Unyielding resistance for table
20. Overturning of table
21. Increased and decreased weight of table
22. Table levitated upside down
23. Muscular force on upturned table
24. Experimenter sitting on table
25. Maximum psychic force on table
26. Unsymmetrical loading of table
27. Ringing an electric bell
28. Trumpet pulled
29. Table pulled from edge of circle
30. Handkerchief on floor
31. Light placed on table
32. Sliding body under table
33. Exploring region below legs of table
34. Exploring region under table
35. Glass tube below table
36. Manometer below table
37. Reaction on floor
38. Ringing electric bell..."
39. Levitation above weighing-machine
40. Levitation above weighing-machine
41. Levitation above weighing-machine
42. lOI
43. )5 _)) 5> •
44. Compression balance below table
45. Compression balance below table
46. Table tilting above balance
47. Compression balance tests
48. Horizontal component of reaction
49. »)} J5 •
50. Vertical downward reaction
51. Reaction and height of platform
52. Reaction and height of platform
53. Stool levitated above balance
54. Electrical test for reaction
55. Reaction on medium
56. Crackling sound in table
57. Thud under table
58. Electroscope under table
59. Space between medium and table
60. Space between medium and table
61. Reaction on floor
62. Condition of medium
63. Weight of levitating structure
64. Page.,
65. Preparation for levitation
66. Actual matter below table
67. Weight lost by sitters
68. Fluorescence
69. Psychic pull
70. 16S
71. 16S
72. Trumpet movements
73. Medium's weight and raps
74. Medium's weight and raps
75. Medium and commencement of seance
76. Distinction between levitation and rapping
77. Bombardment during rapping
78. Shape of rap
79. Typewriter test
80. Raps on putty
81. Electroscope below table
82. Psychic touching of electroscope
83. Psychic touching of electroscope
84. Psychic touching of electroscope
85. Electric shock test
86. Phosphorescence
87. Fluorescence
88. Delicacy of actions on medium
89. Psychic photograph

*Printed in Great Britain by Neill and Co., Ltd., Edinburgh.*

