The Reality of Psychic Phenomena

Raps, Levitations, Etc.

W. J. Crawford

London: John M. Watkins, 1916

Rare & Obscure Books series

Clean reading edition of the public-domain 1916 text (Internet Archive realityofpsychic00craw); wording and spelling are Crawford's, scanner noise removed.

An engineering lecturer weighs the séance table — his measurements are presented as he made them; readers judge.

---

Preface

The experiments described were carried out during portions of the years 1915 and 1916, many of them being recorded in the pages of Light at the time. I have endeavoured in this work to put them more or less in logical sequence so that the reader may understand the processes that led me to enunciate the cantilever theory. Much of the text is, however, now published for the first time.

I am indebted to Mr Seamus Stoupe of the Art Department of the Technical Institute, Belfast, for the two photographs of apparatus; and I have to express my thanks to Messrs W. & T. Avery, Ltd., for the use of their weighing and measuring machines.

I do not discuss in this book the question of the identity of the invisible operators. That is left for another occasion. But in order that there may be no misapprehension, I wish to state explicitly that I am personally satisfied they are the spirits of human beings who have passed into the Beyond.

W. J. CRAWFORD.

Belfast, Sept. 1916.

Contents

1. Preliminary Remarks on the Composition of the Circle, the Phenomena, etc.

2. Phonograph Record of the Noises

3. Reaction during Levitation of the Table

4. Some Miscellaneous Experiments, Observations, and Calculations

5. Conditions above, under, and round the Levitated Table

6. Levitation directly above the Platform of a Weighing Machine

7. Experiments with Compression Spring Balance underneath the Levitated Table

8. Completion of the Experiments on Levitation

9. A Cantilever Theory for Levitation

10. Raps

11. The Rod Theory for Raps

12. Miscellaneous Experiments

13. General Conclusions

List of Experiments

Chapter I — Preliminary Remarks On The Composition Of The Circle, The Phenomena, Etc.

The circle with whose voluntary co-operation I have carried out the experiments recorded in this book, consists of seven members, as follows: — Mr Morrison, Mrs Morrison, Miss Kathleen Goligher, Miss Lily Goligher, Miss Anna Goligher, Mr Goligher, and Master Samuel Goligher. It is altogether a family affair, being composed of father, four daughters, son, and son-in-law, for Mrs Morrison is the sister of the medium. All the members are mediums in a greater or less degree, the various phases of the phenomena presented consisting of trance speaking, automatic writing, table movements, and so on. One member of the family. Miss Kathleen Goligher, the youngest of the four daughters, is, however, a medium of outstanding merit. This young lady was

born on June 27, 1898. She has probably inherited her mediumistic tendencies, for there are psychic traditions in the family on the mother's side. Her mediumship was discovered, as so often happens, more or less by accident. Some three years ago the family was desirous of sitting for physical phenomena, and formed, in the ordinary way, a circle. Rappings were obtained almost at once, and then by a process of elimination — in which the medium was eliminated amongst others — her gift was discovered. Since then the family has regularly conducted its development, week by week, with the result that the physical phenomena now presented are powerful and well regulated.

The whole of the family look upon Spiritualism as their religion, They attend no church other than the Spiritualistic, but they are devoted in their attachment to that — several of the young ladies being members of the choir or serving in other capacities, while Mr Morrison is a member of the Committee, and works hard in the interests of the Society. They are simple and harmonious in their home life, and are in every way fit recipients of the extraordinary phenomena obtained through their instrumentality.

The seances for my experimental work were mostly held in an attic in the house occupied by the medium's family, though I have occasionally held them in my own house, and I have also witnessed the phenomena in the houses of friends. The room or house where the seances are held

seems to make little or no difference, for a few minutes after the circle is formed, wherever it be, phenomena begin to be produced. The attic above referred to was, however, most suitable, as it is kept for no other purpose than for use as a seance-room, and the family also find it more convenient to assemble in their own house. For it must be remembered that each one of my experimental sittings necessitated the attendance and co-operation of eight persons, and in addition there was a great deal of preliminary work to be attended to, such as the provision of apparatus, etc. For psychical research is like no other kind of research. Before we can expect anything worth having in the way of results we must have the following set of conditions as nearly perfect as possible: — (a) A very powerful medium. (b) A circle of sitters supporting the medium. (c) The medium and sitters to be imbued with the seriousness and wonder of the phenomena presented — to be linked together, as it were, by the one object of getting the most out of the phenomena for the common good. (d) A band of operators who have the same objects in view as those mentioned in (c). Mischievous operators or others who will not or cannot co-operate with the experimenter are useless. (e) The phenomena must not be produced spontaneously, but must be under command.

I need hardly say that if money be the chief and only object of the medium's ambition, practically no experimental work can be done. It is a matter of experience — my experience, anyway — that the medium and sitters must not develop any form of material greed, or the phenomena become undependable and unreliable. This does not mean, of course, that a medium may not take reasonable remuneration; but it decidedly means that if she is purely and absolutely concerned with the amount of money she can make out of her psychic gifts, her phenomena suffer.

The five conditions given above for successful experimental work in the psychic realm are, in my opinion, absolutely essential. Omit any one of them, and the results suffer from a scientific point of view. This is probably the reason why so little such work is done. The required conditions are generally too much for the experimenter.

Unless the invisible operators co-operate heartily in experimental work, the results are likely to be of small value, for it goes without saying that spontaneous phenomena are of little use. I think that the thing which has chiefly struck me, during the course of my investigation, has been the wonderful co-operation between the operators and myself. One scarcely becomes used, no matter how long one works at psychical phenomena, to having one's behests attended to by beings who are entirely beyond the confines

of bodily sight. But I can say truly that during all my experimental seances every demand I made of the operators was either successfully carried out or was attempted. They were evidently anxious to submit to every scientific test imposed. Sometimes, but very occasionally, when something stood in the way of the accomplishment of some of my requests, they would spell out a word or sentence which would enable me to understand the obstruction in the way of the production of the phenomenon I particularly wanted. Sometimes I have reason to suppose they would, of their own volition, bring to my attention phases of an experiment which I had overlooked. In the whole of the five conditions enumerated above I have been fortunate in obtaining a very high degree of perfection. Indeed, I cannot see how they could have been greatly improved upon.

I have said that most of my experimental seances were held in an attic in the house occupied by the medium's family. The floor of the room is bare. Each member of the circle possesses a special wooden chair and sits on no other (except on special occasions when I altered the arrangement). Besides the chairs the only other furniture in the room consists of the seance table and a few ornaments on the mantelpiece (except of course when I brought in apparatus). [During the last experimental sitting, however, there was a small cabinet in a corner of the room, the circle having commenced to sit for materialisations;

but during all the other seances the room was as I have described.]

For the general purpose of lighting the seance chamber, a gas jet enclosed in a lantern having a red glass sliding front and side is used. The intensity of the light can thus be considerably varied by means of an ordinary cock. When one becomes used to the red light, the visibility becomes quite good — most objects in the room are quite plainly seen. It is to be regretted that psychical phenomena cannot as a rule be produced in full white light; but we have to take this matter as we find it and submit to the conditions imposed by nature.

For reading small numbers and graduations, such as those on the steelyard of a weighingmachine, I most often employed an electric pocket-lamp with the lens covered with a piece of red tissue-paper.

The seance is opened with the singing of a hymn and a prayer. In a few minutes light raps are usually heard near the medium, which quickly increase in intensity. Within a quarter of an hour most of the phenomena are often in full swing. A hymn is sung occasionally during the course of the seance. The sitting is closed by prayer.

The method of conducting the circle is as simple as possible. The members simply sit round in approximately circle formation and clasp each other's hands in chain order. The seance table is placed on the floor within the circle.

I have found by experience that for the first thirty minutes or so of the sitting, quickest and best results are obtained if the chain formation of hands is adhered to; after that it matters very little whether the circle clasp hands or whether they put hands on knees. This points to the likelihood that during the commencement of a seance processes are in operation which are more or less in abeyance later on, when a condition of psychic equilibrium has been established. I will describe an experiment which would appear to verify this, where the medium was seated on a weighing-machine near the commencement of the stance.

The phenomena presented are purely physical, and physical in the sense that the results depend upon the action of psychic force upon material bodies. No materialisations or partial materialisations have so far occurred. Therefore such phenomena, being due to the action of psychic force alone, can be studied in a more satisfactory manner than would be the case if they were complicated by more advanced types. I hold strongly to the opinion that if the processes resulting in the application of psychic force are once really discovered, then the rest of psychic phenomena will rapidly fall into place and be understandable. Psychic energy — as evidenced in good physical seances — is at the root of the whole thing, and it is useless to expect any great advance until its laws have been unravelled. The Goligher circle allows of

the display of psychic force to the very best advantage. Not only is the force exerted of large magnitude, but it is also accurate, under command, and infinitely variable. Further, all the movements of matter produced by it are telekinetic, or produced without material contact. This is to be thoroughly understood. In no eocperiment which I describe in this booh was there any contact between any portion of the body or dress of the medium or sitters and the 7naterial body under psychic action.

I would, speaking broadly, divide the phenomena produced into two classes: (1) impacts, and (2) movements of material bodies against the action of forces such as those of friction and gravity. The impact phenomena consist of raps and their variations, and are not caused by the action of matter on matter; for instance, I would not term the action of a table leg being raised and being struck on the floor (which I have often observed) an impact phenomenon. The impact type is that where a blow is caused by psychic force being applied suddenly to a material body.

Examples of this type are many at the Goligher circle; amongst others the following variations commonly occur: — {a) raps of all degrees of loudness from the slightest taps to blows which might verily be produced by a sledge-hammer; (b) combinations of raps, such as single knocks, double knocks, treble knocks (two fast, one slow), volleys of raps, imitations

of tunes and dances (the latter including the sand-dance, from the kind of shuffling produced)— in fact, every kind and combination of rap it is possible to imagine; (c) specialities, such as the imitation of a bouncing ball (most perfect in sound quality), imitation of a match being struck, imitation of a man walking and a horse trotting, imitation of the leg of the table being sawn, of the floor being rubbed with sandpaper, and so on.

To the second class belong all movements of material bodies due to the action of psychic force upon them. The levitation of a table is the most spectacular and common, but there are also all kinds of motions of the table upon the floor — translational, rotational, and combinations of these two. The table is sometimes gently lowered about two legs to the floor and replaced in position. A metal trumpet is waved about in the air. A small handbell is taken up and rung. The sitters are sometimes psychically " touched."

A great many people have now seen the phenomena produced through the circle, and I have yet to meet the person who was not deeply impressed. The unseen operators seem to enjoy convincing the believer and sceptic alike of the reality of psychic force. In this connection the reader will be interested to hear how they treat the ordinary lay visitor. The visitor is usually invited to enter the circle, to lay hold of the table (at the moment stationary) and to endeavour to prevent it from moving. Then the tussle begins. If he is very muscular and has his weight nicely placed over the centre of the table, the experimenter may have the better of matters for a short time, though it is amusing to the onlookers to see how hard he is pressed. But sooner or later (usually sooner) the table eludes him, jumps this way and that about the floor, tilts, twists, and, if his muscular pressure is momentarily relaxed, levitates. Then there is more trouble. The table, once levitated, strongly objects to be pushed to the floor, and few persons can push it there, no matter how they try. Then after a struggle with the levitating force the table again becomes tranquil on the floor and the visitor is invited to sit on it. But he does not sit long. In a moment or two it gently rises on two legs and slides him off. Finally it escorts him outside the circle, the " escorting " consisting of forcible ejectment by an overwhelming pressure against his body.

Fraud

Of course, all the experiments recorded in this book depend for any value they may have on the fact that the table movements, levitations, raps, blows, and other phenomena are genuine productions due to the action of psychic force, and are in no way caused by fraudulent action on the part of the medium or members of the circle; and by fraudulent action I refer not only to conscious but also to unconscious imposture.

for without doubt there are cases in which a medium, quite unconsciously to herself, uses methods for the production of phenomena that amount to fraud.

I propose to give here briefly a few of the facts which show that the phenomena produced at the Goligher circle are the genuine thing and are in no way due to conscious or unconscious action on the part of the medium or sitters.

(1) The medium and her family are upright, religious-minded people, who keep to a high moral standard in their daily lives. Each and every one of them is incapable of any wrong action with regard to the ordinary affairs of life. They all look upon the phenomena as specially presented to show that life is continuous after bodily death, of which they are all now absolutely certain; in other words, they are all convinced Spiritualists, and I could not imagine anything that could alter their convictions in this matter.

(2) All the seances are looked upon as religious institutions. They are invariably opened and closed by prayer. No levity is permitted.

(3) All the members of the circle are my personal friends, and I have had an intimate knowledge of them for three years. I understand exactly their views of life and of things in general, their idiosyncrasies, their high standard of rectitude, and their attitude regarding the phenomena and its relation to themselves.

(4) The medium is the least enthusiastic

member of the circle. She is the only one who cares little about the phenomena. I think she sits more as an obligation to the others than for any innate satisfaction to herself. Whether phenomena are obtained at the seances or not does not affect her in the least.

(5) The medium is a private one. She charges nothing. I have never paid her one penny for any of the seances she has so kindly given me. She is very averse to looking upon her mediumship as a commercial asset.

(6) No dark seances are held. The light is usually strong enough — after the eyes get accustomed to its red colour — to see quite plainly all the sitters. It is a subdued kind of light, issuing from a large surface of oiliinary gas flame. The only difficulty in the visibility is where a table or other large body casts a shadow over a portion of the floor. The hands of the sitters can nearly always be quite plainly seen, and it is a simple experiment, while the seance table is levitated a foot or more in the air, to ask the sitters to raise their hands (joined in chain order) up to the level of their heads, so that the observer can be quite sure that the hands have nothing whatever to do with the phenomenon. The observer at this time may be within the circle, and he may move anywhere inside it so long as he does not get immediately in front of the medium. The only place in shadow, if the table is comparatively large (if it is a small one he can see right round it), is between the foot of the table

and the medium. But even with the largest table it is sometimes possible to see completely under it (as I have done), to see the feet and bodies of all present at rest and hands held together in chain order, while the table has been steadily levitated. It comes to this, then, that the only region not always visible (and this is only sometimes the case) is the region in the neighbourhood of the medium just above and on the floor. In many cases of levitation, the levitated table, the space all round, above, and over it, and all the sitters are quite plainly visible.

(7-) The medium was quite conscious during all my experimental investigations, and any fraud presented would therefore be in the nature of deliberate action. She herself was always keenly interested in the experiments, and has told me she enjoys such sittings much more than ordinary development seances. It was amusing to watch how interested she was when, say, an electric bell was rung by the reaction under a levitated table, or when other experimental work was in progress. Many times I have observed the keenness with which she followed what went on, evidently forgetting for the time being that she herself was the prime cause of all the phenomena, and that without her there would have been nothing.

(8) It matters not one whit whether the members of the circle come to the seance-room in their ordinary boots or shoes, in their stocking

soles, or in soft felt slippers. The thunderous blows on the floor within the circle are not in the least affected as regards magnitude. One distinguished visitor to the circle, after hearing the tremendous din caused by the "raps," had the fact pointed out to him that all the members wore soft felt slippers, and that with hands all visibly joined it was an impossibility to produce such noises normally. The medium on this occasion was asked to remove her slippers in order that it might be shown no hard substance was concealed therein; which, of course, she immediately did, with results evidently satisfactory to the visitor.

(9) A great many people have been invited to visit the circle and witness the phenomena. I think I can say that not one of all these has come away from it without the assurance that "there is something in psychic force," be he previously sceptic, believer, or a sitter " on the fence." Of course, the visitor is not always certain that the phenomena are produced by spirits of the dead; but at least he is sure of this, that they are genuine and in no way due to normal action on the part of the medium or members of the circle.

(10) The magnitude of the motions applied to the table must be seen to be believed. Often a force approximating a hundredweight is exerted. A visitor is invited to enter the circle, as already explained, to lay hold of the table, and to try to prevent its motion. I have never yet seen this

successfully accomplished. Now, the only way such movements could be given normally to the table is by the feet of the medium, for all hands and bodies of sitters and medium are quite plainly seen, and the only part that may be in shadow is near the feet of the medium. It can be proved conclusively by direct experiment that even if the medium were to lie back in her chair, spread her feet out so that they were under the surface of the table, eighteen inches or more away, and endeavour to levitate it or move it about, such motion of her body would be immediately detected, and that a man pressing immediately over the table could prevent even the slightest motion by a ridiculously small effort, whereas, as already mentioned, the strongest man cannot in reality do so. The leverage from the medium's feet to her body is so great that a very small force only is required to prevent motion.

(11) If the medium leans back in her chair and endeavours to levitate the table with her feet, she may do so for a few seconds, in a stilted, jerky kind of fashion; but the real levitation is quite different in character and quality from the spurious one, and the latter can only be maintained for a very short time.

(12) I have spent many hours within the circle in all places round it, and I have continually worked under the levitated table and between the levitated table and the medium; I have had complicated instruments below the table; I

have often placed my arm and hand in the space between medium and table and felt her feet and legs absolutely still during the course of experiments in which the table was levitated and the instruments were registering below it; and I say finally that if the medium had desired to impose, she could not, no matter how she tried, have kept the table levitated and the instruments registering at the same time, while my hands were on such instruments and I myself close to her feet and working between her and the table.

(13) It is well to analyse a few of the experimental results with regard to the theory of fraud. The experiments in Chapter III. show conclusively that while the table is steadily levitated nearly the whole of its weight is upon the medium. Therefore it follows that if anyone is lifting the table with any part of his body, it is the medium, and the others are not concerned. The medium's hands are always quite visible, and the only part of her sometimes in deep shadow (if the table is a comparatively large one) is from her knees downwards. Now, it is impossible for her to put her feet below the surface of the table unless she leans back in her chair and sprawls her body forward into the circle space (as already mentioned), and such a manoeuvre would be instantly detected. But if we suppose (taking the most unfavourable case) that she could do this, the only way in which she could levitate the table would be with her feet. We therefore

narrow down any theory of fraud to the surreptitious use by the medium of her feet.

Consider Experiment 50, where there was a large compression balance below the table during levitation. The balance was reading SO lbs. while the table was in the air a foot above the floor. How could this be accomplished by fraudulent means on the part of the medium? Only in one way. One foot would have to be levitating the table and the other would have to be pressing down on the pan of the balance, an exceedingly difficult matter indeed, and practically impossible, as experiment proves, even when all possible help is given to the medium, including holding her arms tight to prevent her falling. Supposing, however, that she could accomplish this, how is it that for the same table and the same balance, the balance read the same amount within half a pound every time I tried the experiment, and I tried it often? How could she gauge the downward force so accurately each time? Would there not be a variation of several pounds at least?

Experiment further shows that the downward force on the balance is applied gradually and at a uniform rate, and that the table always springs into the air at the same instant, i.e. when the balance reads just about SO lbs,, and that there is never any variation during successful levitation in this arrangement. If the medium pressed down on the balance with one foot, would she be able to apply the pressure so gradually and

uniformly, and would she be able to levitate the table always at the same relative instant?

In Experiment 46 (E) I actually placed my hand and part of my arm in the scale-pan of the balance while it was registering and while the table was levitated above it. There was nothing in the pan, and furthermore both the levitation and the reading on the balance were in this instance unaffected.

Take Experiments 48 and 49. The medium's feet were near the nail N on the floor. I placed them there and felt them from time to time, and they never moved. There were three sets of phenomena in simultaneous operation in these experiments: (1) table levitated; (2) balance B reading; (3) balance S reading. My position was near S, and my hands were continually moving to and fro in front of the medium's feet and between her feet and the table. Furthermore, during half a dozen readings or more I took, the readings on the balances hardly varied at all.

Take Experiments 51 and 52. Those show conclusively that when the table is levitated above the platform E, there is no reaction on the platform until it reaches a height of about three inches above the floor. That is to say, if the medium is frauding, she lifts the table with one foot only, until E is about three inches above the floor, and then (and not until then) places the other foot on E and (as the tabulation of Experiment 52 shows) increases with that foot

the pressure on the platform as the latter is gradually raised in height. This would be a silly procedure, as (if the thing were possible at all, which it is not) she would naturally press on the platform at its lowest position, and would not wait until it was about three inches above the floor and then nicely regulate her pressure to about three-quarters of a pound.

In Experiment 22 it is shown that the table may have its weight so greatly increased that a strong man leaning over it cannot raise it from the floor. How can this be done by fraud with a table consisting of a top and four legs only? Again, a favourite test for visitors is to grasp the table while it is levitated eighteen inches up in the air and to try to prevent it reaching the floor again. This is impossible, as the table is pulled down so powerfully that a strong man cannot hold it back. This experiment is impossible by fraud under the conditions of the seance-room.

In Experiments 34, 35, 36, and 37 it is shown that I moved my arms, my hands, and rods freely below the levitated table and encountered no solid body whatever.

In Experiments 59 and 60 I moved apparatus freely in front of the medium between her and the table, and / could plainly see the whole space and also the table.

In general I have worked for the best part of a year below and round about the levitated table; I have explored the whole space surrounding it on many occasions; I have thoroughly observed by sight and by the use of instruments all that is to be noted; and I say now finally that every phenomenon occurring at the Goligher circle is absolutely genuine to the minutest detail. So conscientious are the medium and members of the circle that any accidental movement of the foot or body on the part of any is always immediately mentioned. It is, as I have said, a private family circle, and the greatest harmony exists amongst all the sitters. They have voluntarily allowed me to carry out the experiments without hope or thought of gain on their part, their idea being that since so many and such highgrade phenomena have been presented through them, they should do a little to help others not so fortunately placed; and they consider they have done this by allowing me to experiment.

To Miss Kathleen Goligher, one of the greatest and best of physical mediums, I feel that it is necessary publicly to apologise for having, in her case, even to mention the fraud hypothesis. She knows, however, that I must do so. The truth, of course, is that nobody who has not visited the circle can have even the faintest idea of the magnitude of the forces involved, and the extraordinary variety and intensity of the phenomena produced. To all visitors the phenomena are so manifestly aud palpably genuine that they are never troubled again with doubts as to whether there is such a thing as psychic force.

I will conclude my brief references to this matter by reproducing an article of mine from Light, written in reply to some of the usual sceptics who will believe nothing unless they themselves are witnesses: —

" Where was the Imposture, Conscious or Unconscious?

" I would like to say here that it is naturally repugnant both to myself and to Miss Goligher that any aspersions should be cast upon the genuineness of her mediumship. She is an upright and honourable young woman, has received no monetary recompense for what she has done, and has always been willing to give me her services freely in the cause of science. Her mediumship is absolutely beyond dispute, as many people, some of them well known, are able with certainty to say. However, she knows it is my duty to set at rest the minds of those who are afraid of unconscious mediumistic action and the like; of those who, not having been able to attend her seances and see for themselves what actually happens, wish to know what precautions have been taken, and what independent witnesses have to say.

" Fig. 1 represents in plan the following: — " {a) The medium (M) and sitters (S... S) in position for the seance, the approximate diameter of the circle being 5 ft., the sitters seated on chairs; the medium seated on a chair placed on top of a drawing-board fastened to the

platform of a weighing-machine. The square round the circle for the medium represents the weighing-machine. X is my position with

©

®

Stool

©

*Fig. 1.*

® ®

®

reference to the medium, close to her right side. The weighing-machine was one of Avery's latest patterns, new, tested before being sent to me, tested by me before use, reading to 4 cwt., and sensitive to less than 2 oz.

" (b) The light (L), an ordinary gas jet burning in a box behind |red glass, the box being

placed on a mantelpiece about 4 ft. high, and in the approximate position shown. The visibilitywas such that from my position I could clearly see each sitter.

(c) In the centre of the circle the stool, with whose levitation we are concerned. It was a small wooden one weighing 2 lb. 12 oz.

" (d) Two observers marked O, O standing outside the circle, behind it, on the side opposite to me.

" Time of Experiment. — About an hour from opening of seance, with psychic energy at a maximum.

 Preliminary Arrangement. — Sitters unclasped hands and sat with hands on knees. Medium seated upright on chair on weighing-machine, with her feet close together on drawing-board (which was tied to platform of machine) and a hand, palm downwards, flat on each knee. Medium and machine completely isolated from other members of the circle. My instructions to her were to remain perfectly still. Having placed her in position, I carefully took the combined weight of medium, chair, and drawingboard. It was 9 St. 10 lb. 12 oz. The steelyard was just on the quiver. I placed the stool in the centre of the circle on the floor and came back and stood by the medium.

" Instructions to Operators. — To levitate the stool as high as possible and to keep it levitated until I desired it to be lowered.

" The Phenomenon. — The stool immediately rose vertically into the air, until its height, at

a conservative estimate, was 4 ft. above the floor. It obligingly rose just opposite the light, so that I could see plainly over it, beyond it on each side, and under it. I placed my head close to that of my medium, and saw that the legs of the stool were just about on a level with the top of her head.

Effect on the Weighing- Machine. — Immediately the stool levitated the lever of the weighingmachine rose with a click, plainly audible, against the top stop of the machine, indicating that the medium's weight had been increased. I adjusted the rider so that the lever again just balanced.

" Control of Medium, — I placed my hand on the medium's right arm near the shoulder, passed it down her arm to her wrist, felt both wrists on her knees, and her knees and lower limbs perfectly still, as I had placed them. (The only difference was that her arms during the levitation were rigidly still — a characteristic of all levitations.) This I did two or three times. I could also, of course, see the medium, as, the stool being so small and so high in the air, practically no shadows were cast. While I was doing this I kept looking at the stool, which remained nearly immovable about 4 ft. up in the air. While my hand was controlling her arm and knees, I carefully looked round every member of the circle and saw that all hands were accounted for, each on the owner's knees. The nearest edge of the levitated stool was at least 3½ ft. from the medium's knees.

It is to be remembered that the stool was floating on a level with the heads of the sitters.

" Instructions to Operators. — When the stool had been thus up for about 1½ minutes, and everybody had examined it, I asked the operators to move it gently up and down in the air.

'' Ejfect on Weighing- Machine. — The lever went gently up and down against the stop in synchronism with the up-and-down movement of the stool. Everybody saw the up-and-down motion of the stool in the air quite plainly. Everybody could plainly see over, under, and all round the stool.

"The stool became steady in the air again. Finally, when I had examined it to my heart's content, and also the members of the circle and the medium, 1 asked the operators to lower the stool gently to the floor. This they immediately did, the stool slowly descending and softly touching the floor.

 Effect on Weighing- Machine. — Lever immediately fell against bottom stop, indicating decreased weight of medium.

" Weighing-machine readings: —

Weight of medium -l- chair

4- board before levitation = 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz. Weight of medium + chair

+ board during steady

levitation... = 9 st. 13 lb. 10 oz.

Increased weight of medium = 2 lb. 14 oz.

Weight of stool.. = 2 lb. 12 oz.

" General. — The space between the medium and the levitated stool was not dark. I have been careful to understate rather than to overstate. 1 invite anyone to say where the fraud was in this particular case. If letters be kindly sent to me, care of Editor, I will go into any of the points raised. I would warn amateurs, however, that their explanations must cover at least 50 per cent, of the facts, including the results on the weighing-machine.''

I wish to add finally that I fully satisfied myself, during each of the experiments described in this book, there was absolutely no fraud, and that the phenomena were due to the action of psychic force alone.

Chapter II — Phonograph Record Of The Noises

Experiment 1: Using a phonograph to verify the objective character of the noises.

A matter that required attention at the very beginning of the investigation was the question of the objective character of the phenomena. For one line of argument against the reality of psychic phenomena is to ascribe them to false sense-impressions received during a species of hypnotic trance induced by the peculiar conditions of the seance-room. Its advocates have it that the brain of man is so complex, so relatively unexplored, and so subject to deception, that it is incapable of dealing in simple fashion with psychic occurrences. In other words, the raps, knocks, levitations, and other manifestations are not objective but are hallucinatory effects produced on the subjective consciousness. This kind of argument, however, as the result of the great number of observations being continually made, and the common sense of the people who make them, as well as by reason of our advance

in the knowledge of the laws of hypnotism, is losing most of its grip. Almost everybody who studies psychic phenomena is convinced, by the evidence of his senses, of their objective reality. Various pieces of apparatus have been devised in the past to render this objectivity certain. Flashlight photographs have been taken of levitated tables. Movements due to psychic action have been recorded automatically. There is therefore little ground for any such hypothesis as that of collective hallucination. Nevertheless, I thought it wise to perform one experiment to satisfy myself that the noises — raps, knocks, blows, shufflings, and so forth — were really objective sounds and not figments of the imagination. In order to accomplish this I made use of the phonograph.

I recognised that the taking of a satisfactory phonographic record would be a somewhat difficult matter, as the experimenter would have to submit to the hard-and-fast conditions of the seance-room, and would be unable, in any appreciable degree, to modify these conditions to his own advantage. I therefore called upon Mr T. Edens Osborne, who deals in large quantities of phonographs, and who knows as much about such instruments as any man in Belfast, and together we made some experiments in a small uncarpeted room at the top of his premises. We found that with the phonograph on the floor (it was an Edison " Standard ") rough imitations of raps made with the handle of a penknife came fairly clear, so long as the origin of the sounds was not more than a foot or so distant from the recording trumpet. We experimented for a considerable time, trying variations of height of the phonograph, and variations in character and position of the noises. Then I spoke a few words into the machine to the effect that I took the record (to follow) on 11th June 1915, and giving the name of the medium. This occupied only a short length of the cylinder, and the remainder was left blank.

The seance was held at eight o'clock on the evening of the date mentioned. The instrument was taken to the seance-room and placed on the floor in front of the seance-table, which was itself just in front of the medium (the table was afterwards removed). I placed some folded newspapers under it to deaden any vibration that might be caused by the more intense blows to be anticipated when the phenomena were in full operation. Then I inserted the cylinder above alluded to. The red gaslight was turned on and the seance commenced. In the usual way, slight raps were soon given in the vicinity of the medium, which quickly increased in intensity and volume. I may mention that the operators appeared to know all about this particular seance and its object, and had seemingly made preparations for it and were even keenly interested in it. At the suggestion of one of the circle, I explained to them the mechanism of the phonograph. This, however, did not appear to be

altogether necessary. Then I asked for a rehearsal. This was immediately given — a little of everything in the way of knocks; and in addition, a small hand-bell was unexpectedly taken up and rung, which finally satisfied me that I had not much to tell the invisible entities as to what was required of them on this particular occasion. Then the question of time came in, and I found that the operators were not accurately able to gauge the minute and a half which was to be allowed them on each record. Accordingly, as a rough guide, a time duration of a minute and a half was measured to them by a watch. I then asked them to give a rap when they were ready for me to enter the circle (I recognised that 1 was ignorant of the psychic conditions obtaining within the circle, and I have made it an invariable rule always to let the operators arrange matters to suit themselves before carrying out an experiment, so long as the conditions I imposed were not broken). In five minutes or so, the summoning knock being heard, I moved into the circle, placed the recorder on the cylinder, and put my finger on the starting-lever. I then asked the operators if all was ready, and on their replying by three raps in the affirmative I called out, " Start." Immediately a thunderous blow resounded on the floor and I started the machine. Half a dozen sledge-hammer blows, varieties of double and treble knocks, and shufflings like sand-paper rubbing the floor were given in succession; the

hand-bell was lifted and rung; the legs of the table were raised and knocked on the floor; the sound of wood being apparently sawn was heard; and so on. They kept up this terrific noise until I called out, " Stop "; when, at the word, perfect silence reigned. We then tried the record, and found that most of the noises had been recorded; but the bell, owing to its being rung too far away, was almost inaudible. I therefore suggested to the operators that they should ring the bell right in the middle of the circle and as near the trumpet of the phonograph as possible, and I promised not to upset their conditions of equilibrium by attempting to touch it. Accordingly, during the taking of the next record the bell was rung within an inch or two of my hand, and so close to the trumpet that it accidentally touched it and knocked it off the instrument. This partly spoiled the record.

In all, three good records and the partly spoiled one were taken, and these show beyond dispute, as was anticipated, that the sounds are ordinary objective sounds. Of course, the volume and intensity of the reproduced sounds are as nothing to the original ones, and the bell comes out only faintly; but they are all there, and on these four records we have, although in greatly diminished strength, nearly the whole gamut of phenomenal noises produced at the circle. The actual noises are said to have been the loudest ever given at the circle, and were

heard quite easily two stories down, and even outside the house.

I append the following note by the Editor which appeared in Light of 7th Aug. 1915: —

*' It will be remembered that in Light of June 26th last (p. 304) Dr Crawford described an experiment in which he had taken phonograph records of the raps, bell-ringing, and other sounds produced at the seances for the physical phenomena which he is investigating. On Thursday, 29th ult., Mr Horace Leaf, who has recently visited Ireland, called upon us with one of the records kindly sent by Dr Crawford, and this was tested on a phonograph — the various sounds (with the exception of the bell-ringing, which was very faint) being clearly audible.

" Dr Crawford has thus proved to the satisfaction of himself and his fellow-investigators that the noises produced are objective sounds and not the result of collective hallucination — an important matter to the scientific investigator who desires to check his results at every step."

At lectures in Belfast and Dublin I have made use of the records for demonstration purposes. The sounds recorded are quite clearly audible in a hall holding up to five hundred people.

The matter is referred to in the following extract from the hish Times of 13th March 1916:—

"A meeting of the Dublin Section of the Psychical Research Society was held on Saturday

evening in the Mills' Hall, Marion Row. The Rev. E. Savill Hicks presided. Dr W. J. Crawford, of Belfast, gave a lecture on some experiments which have been conducted in Belfast during the past couple of years. He described how seven persons, all very religious people, sat from time to time in an attic, where there was no furniture but a plain wooden table and the chairs they sat on. The experiments had been conducted in good light and under the best conditions, and had been verified by instrumental means. A phonograph had been used to take a record of the raps that were heard on the table. (These raps were reproduced on an instrument here for the benefit of the audience.) The lecturer told how the table had been lifted and held suspended in the air for nearly five minutes, and how it defied the strength of a man to prevent the levitation. A stool had been lifted and a bell had been rung in the same mysterious way. Sometimes the * raps' were as loud as the blows of a sledgehammer, and could be heard outside the house. The object of the whole research, he said, was to find, if possible, the laws underlying the phenomena. Investigation had been going on for two years, and had not yet been concluded,"

Chapter III — Reaction During Levitation Of The Table

One of the first questions I asked myself when I decided to undertake a series of experiments was, naturally, the whereabouts of the seat of the reaction during levitation of the table. 1 had seen the table floating in the air, as it were, off and on for a period of over a year, and often I had wondered if the reaction was on the floor immediately below the table, or if it was on the medium herself, or if, indeed, it was located in neither of these positions. At that date I had not the slightest idea where I would find it, and any theorising I did usually ended in placing it in a different position on each occasion. Indeed, I do not desire to conceal the fact that even after eighteen months' observation I felt entirely ignorant of the mechanics of the whole phenomenon, the consequence being that I had at first to follow the " hit-or-miss " principle, trusting to luck that I might alight on something which would put me on the right track. I decided, therefore, that the best thing to do would be to seat the medium on the platform

u

of a weighing-machine and see what would happen to her weight when the table was levitated. I did not know if the placing of the medium on the weighing-machine would inhibit the levitation, and I did not know at that period if the breaking of the chain formation of the circle, i.e. the unclasping of hands and placing them on the knees (for it is obvious that it would be useless to take readings of the medium's weight unless she was completely isolated from the sitters on each side of her), would likewise prevent the phenomenon. I had to trust to luck in these things.

Before describing as carefully as I can the experiments I made in an endeavour to ascertain the seat of the reaction, I will briefly state, even at the risk of recapitulation, the motions I have observed — and often observed — with regard to the levitated table. The table may be steadily stable, i.e. it may remain fixed practically immovable in the air without apparent support, for a minute or more. I do not think I have ever observed the table absolutely immovable over this period of time; there have always been minute movements and tremors in it; but for practical purposes it can be suspended, as it were, so as to be at rest. Then while levitated it can be moved up and down in a vertical line, and it can be moved to and fro practically horizontally (this latter motion is, however, not exactly a true one in a horizontal plane, for the table seems to be moved more

or less with its base as a pivot). Then the table may rock about in the air exactly like a boat pitching on a somewhat stormy sea, the analogy being so close that the observer can almost visualise the " waves " beneath it. There are also various other movements which I have often observed, such as a to-and-fro motion in the air with one end steadily tilted, and so on, but for the purposes of the experiments those mentioned above are the most important. And it is to be remembered that any of these various movements can be obtained at will, i,e. the experimenter has only to ask the operators for the particular motion he wishes, and it is given immediately.

The Apparatus. — A platform weighingmachine; a drawing-board; some string; four tables.

The platform weighing-machine was kindly lent me by Messrs W. & T. Avery, Ltd. It is known as the light, portable, platform type, and an illustration is given herewith (fig. 2). It reads up to 4 cwt. and is sensitive to less than 2 oz., although the smallest movement of the rider is equivalent to exactly 2 oz. The machine was quite new, and was, of course, tested by the makers for accuracy before being sent to me. The dimensions of its platform were 22 in. by 17 in.

The drawing-board was an ordinary wooden one of half-imperial size, viz. 24 in. by 18 in., about an inch thick. I placed this upon the

platform of the weighing-machine, for I considered the dimensions of the platform were rather small for the work in hand.

*Fig. 2.*

The string was used tofix loosely the drawingboard to the back-rail of the machine to prevent it falling if I required to move the machine about the room. The vertical distance from



the floor to the top surface of the drawingboard was approximately 7 in.

The particulars of the tables used were as follows: —

Table 1. — The ordinary rectangular deal seance-table; four straight legs; surface, 24 in. X 17 in.; dimensions outside legs, 17½ in. x 15½ in.; height, 2 ft. 5 in.; area of surface, 408 sq. in.; area of base, 271 sq. in.; weight, 10 lb. 6 oz. This was the table used for a variety of experiments besides the particular ones I am describing now, and when I henceforth refer to the seance-table I mean this one.

Table 2. — Octagonal bamboo table; four legs; length of octagonal edge, 7½ in.; dimensions outside legs, 12 in. x 12 in.; height, 27½ in.; area of surface, 271 sq. in.; area of base, 144 sq. in.; weight, 6 lb.

liable 3. — Bamboo table for holding ornaments. Besides the ordinary surface it had an underleaf for supporting a flower-pot; four legs; top surface, 17 in. x 17 in.; lower surface, 9½ in. x 9½ in.; dimensions outside legs, 12 in. x 12 in.; height, 2 ft. 5 in.; area of top surface, 289 sq. in.; area of lower surface, 90 sq. in.; area of base, 1 44 sq. in.; weight, 6 lb. 4 oz.

Table 4. — More strictly, a rectangular wooden stool; four legs; surface, 12f in. x 13f in.; dimensions outside legs, 8 in. x 8 in.; height 11½ in.; area of surface, 175 sq. in.; area of base, 64 sq. in.; weight, 2 lb. 12 oz.

The experiments on reaction were not completed at one seance, but were done in three stages at three different sittings; which method, it seems to me, is helpful in eliminating sources of error that might go undetected on any single occasion.

Method. — I placed a table on the floor in the centre of the circle, and seated the medium on a chair placed on top of the drawing-board, which rested on the platform of the weighing-machine. Her feet were planted firmly on the surface of the board. The circle held each other's hands in chain order for half an hour or so with the object of allowing the seance to be well started and psychic energy to be fully developed. At the end of that time I asked the members of the circle to unclasp hands and to place them firmly on their knees. I personally placed the medium's hands squarely on her knees and saw that each sitter had his or hers similarly fixed. I told the medium to sit perfectly still during the experiment, and this she did, not perceptibly moving throughout the tests. She was then physically isolated from all the members of the circle. During all the experiments I stood quite close to her at her right side.

I describe the tests from notes taken at the time. The reader must be prepared for a certain amount of recapitulation; but as experiments such as these on levitation under such ideal conditions can so rarely be carried out, and as therefore all details and data concerning them

should in my opinion be carefully preserved, I do not think it is necessary to apologise. In other classes of scientific research 1 would not think of publishing details so much alike, but in psychic work we are far removed from all the ordinary scientific conventions.

Experivient 2: Reaction on the medium during levitation.

The table used was No. 1 (the ordinary seancetable, see p. 38). I accurately balanced the weight of medium, chair on which she was sitting, and drawing-board. The medium sitting perfectly still, I asked the operators to levitate the table and keep it as steadily levitated as they possibly could, i.e. without up-and-down or toand-fro motion, while I was making my observations. Immediately on request the table rose about 8 in. into the air in an approximately horizontal plane (the levitations in general varied from about 8 in. to 12 in. in height, though in the case of the stool much higher results were obtained), and became to all appearance quite steady in the air. As soon as I was satisfied that all was right and that the medium was sitting perfectly still as 1 had placed her, I examined the weighing-machine. The steelyard, which before the levitation was just on the balance, was now hard up against the top stop. I moved the rider along until it again just balanced. The following are the readings: —

9 St. 4 lb. 14

oz.

10 St. 0 lb.

oz.

9 1b.

oz.

10 lb.

oz.

Weight of medium + chair

+ drawing-board before

levitation Weight of medium + chair

+ drawing-board during

steady levitation Increase in medium's weight

due to levitation Weight of table

Conclusion. — The increase in weight of the medium due to levitation is 10 oz. short of the weight of table.

Notes. — The levitation was as nearly perfect as could be, and time was not a factor, as I had concluded my observations and there were no signs of the table descending. I had, in fact, to inform the operators that I had finished and to ask them to drop the table, which they did suddenly, so that it reached the floor with a crash.

Experiment 3: Reaction on medium during levitation.

The table used was No. 1 (the ordinary seancetable). The method was exactly the same as in Experiment 2, but the date was some weeks later. The following were the readings: —

Weight of medium -I- chair 4- drawing-board before levitation... = 9 st. 4 lb. 0 oz.

Weight of medium + chair

+ drawing-board during

steady levitation.. = 10 st. 0 lb. 8 oz. Increase in medium'sweight

due to levitation.. = 10 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of table.. = 10 lb. 6 oz.

Weight of medium + chair

+ drawing-board at end

of experiment.. = 9 st. 4 lb. 0 oz.

Conclusion. — The increase in the medium's weight due to levitation is 2 oz. in excess of the weight of the table.

Notes. — At the conclusion of the test it will be seen that I again took the dead weight of medium 4- chair + drawing-board, and that I found no alteration. There seems from this case to be no doubt that during levitation the medium increases in weight by an amount practically equal to the weight of the table. In Experiment 2 her increased weight was 10 oz. short of the weight of the table. But during that experiment the full circle was present, and on this occasion Master Sam Goligher was absent on holiday; so that in the former case some or all of the 10 oz. may have been upon him, or the difference may have been due to experimental errors.

Eocperivient 4: Reaction on the medium during levitation.

The tables used were Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 in rotation, and the date was some weeks later

REACTION DURING LEVITATION

than for Experiment 3. The method used was much the same, the only difference being that as soon as I had obtained the result for one table I removed it from the centre of the circle and placed the next in its place, and so on. The following were the readings: —

Weight of medium + chair + drawing-board before levitation... = 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz.

(It will be noticed that the medium was increasing in weight during the interval of about three months separating Experiments 2 and 4.)

Description.

Weight of medium + chair + board during

levitation.

Additional

weight of

medium

due to

levitation.

Weight of table.

Ordinary seance Octagonal bamboo. Ornamental,, Stool.

10 St. 61b. 14oz.

10,, 2,, 6,,

10 „ 2 „10 „

9 „ 13 „10 „

10 lb. 2 oz. 5 M 10 „ 5,, 14 „ 2 „ 14 „

10 lb. 8 oz. 6 „ 0 „

6 „ 4 „ 2 „ 12 „

The dead weights given above for the tables were taken at the end of the seance, and tables 2, 3, and 4 agreed absolutely in weight with values obtained on previous occasions, while table 1 was on this occasion 2 oz. heavier.

Conclusion. — The weight of each levitated table is practically added to the weight of the medium.

Notes. — All the levitations were as nearly

perfect as possible, and were maintained as long as I desired. I was not in the least hurried over my observations. The levitation of the stool was the most spectacular case of the phenomenon I have seen. So high was the stool in the air, it is no exaggeration to say that if I had bent my head I could have walked right under it from one side of the room to the other.

It is convenient to compare the results of Experiments 2, 3, and 4 by a percentage method.

Table.

Weight of table.

Additional

weight of

medium during

levitation.

Percentage additional weight of medium to

weight of table.

1, Experiment 2 1, „ 3

1, „ 4

2, „ 4

3, „ 4

4, „ 4

10 lb. 6 oz.

10 „ 6 „

10 „ 8,,

6 „ 0 „

6 „ 4 „

2 „ 12 „

9 lb. 12 oz. 10 „ 8 „ 10 „ 2 „ 5 „ 10 „ 5 „ 14 „ 2 „ 14 „

93-9

101-2

96-4

93 7

94 0 104-5

An average of the percentages in the last column of the tabulation gives for the six cases 97*3 per cent, as the percentage of additional weight of medium to weight of table.

The general conclusions from Experiments 2, 3, and 4 are as follows: —

A. When the table is steadily levitated, a weight is added to the medium very nearly equal to the weight of the table.

B. The seat of the reaction would therefore

appear to be chiefly the medium herself.

C. Taking an average over the six cases, the

increased weight on the medium seems to be about 3 per cent, less than the weight of the levitated table.

After having thus satisfied myself that the seat of the reaction was principally the medium, I wished to discover if the slight diminution of about 3 per cent, in weight indicated in conclusion C was a real quantity or was simply due to experimental inaccuracies. First, let us take the sources of error likely to arise during the experiment.

(1) Time. — There was no undue hurry in obtaining any result. The table was always levitated for a much longer time than I required to leisurely carry out the experiment. In fact, in all six cases I had to ask the operators to drop the table at the conclusion of the test. A levitation lasting from two to three minutes gives ample time to obtain a fairly accurate balance on a weighing-machine.

(2) Errors due to Table moving about slightly in the air. — This is a positive source of error, and has to be guarded against very carefully. Every movement in the air of the levitated table causes an alteration in the weight of the medium. I will consider this point in more detail presently. Meanwhile it is sufficient to say that during the six levitations recorded above the table was as

steadily levitated as could be. No doubt there were little jerks and tremors, for, according to my observation, it is impossible to have perfectly immobile suspension; but, if so, they were not apparent, and one could say that for all practical purposes the table was on each occasion perfectly at rest in the air.

(3) Ordinary Experimental Errors. — These are fairly well guarded against by taking an average of several results.

The question, then, as to whether the additional weight on the medium is a little less than the weight of the levitated table seems not so much a matter of experimental errors as of something due to some other cause. What this other cause is can be readily surmised. Do the other sitters in the circle, i.e. those exclusive of the medium, take any of the weight of the table? While most of the reaction undoubtedly finds its seat upon the medium, is there a small part located upon the other sitters? It is not an unreasonable supposition. A ccordingly I endeavoured to carry out an experiment to discover if there was any foundation for it.

Ejoperiment 5: To ascertain if any of the weight of the steadily levitated table was added to one of the members of the circle other than the medium.

Method. — I experimented with Mr Morrison, whose place in the circle is on the immediate right of the medium. At nearly the conclusion

of the stance I seated Mr Morrison on the chair on the weighing-machine, and the medium took her ordinary chair. All hands being on their owners' knees, he was thus isolated from the medium and from all the sitters. I carefully took his weight + weight of chair and drawingboard. Then, having carefully balanced the machine, I asked the operators to levitate the table steadily in the ordinary way. This they did. The following were the readings (the table was the ordinary seance one, weight 10 lb. 6 oz.): —

Weight of Mr Morrison

+ chair + board before

levitation... = 10 st, 7 lb. 6 oz.

Weight of Mr Morrison

+ chair + board during

steady levitation.. = 10 st. 7 lb. 8 oz.

Difference.... 2 oz.

The difference of 2 oz. here registered is too small for any conclusion to be drawn, but taken in conjunction with the following experiment would seem to place the result beyond dispute: —

Experiment 6: The result of Experiment 5 being inconclusive, to see if a vertical motion of table in the air would have any effect on Mr Morrison's weight while he was seated on the weighing-machine.

Method. — With conditions as they were in Experiment 5, 1 asked the operators to jerk

the levitated table up and down in the air, which they did. The steelyard of the weighingmachine, previously balanced, went up and down lightly against the stops in synchronism with the movements of the table. I repeated the experiment several times until I was perfectly sure of the result.

Conclusion. — A very small part of the reaction of the levitated table is located upon Mr Morrison. By inference, therefore, a small part of the reaction is located on all or on several of the sitters exclusive of the medium.

I therefore draw the complete conclusion from the results of Experiments 2 to 6, that when the table is steadily levitated, the reaction falls to the extent of at least 95 per cent, upon the body of the medium, and that a very small proportion, not more than 5 per cent., is distributed over the bodies of the other sitters. As Admiral Moore suggests, when a table is steadily levitated the effect is precisely the same as it would be if the medium lifted it herself with her hands, aided by a very slight assistance from the members constituting the circle — say, the help that could be given by a force applied by one finger each. It is, however, to be remembered that Experiment 6 does not show absolutely that each member actually helps in the levitation. One or more of them may be neutrals. Experiments 2 to 5 have dealt with a system in equilibrium, i.e. with the table steadily levitated in the air and as nearly without motion as possible. It is evident, however, that the apparatus used in those experiments was quite suitable for obtaining results — not so accurate, perhaps, but nevertheless of much value — when the table was purposely given various motions while suspended in the air, or while it was moved in various directions along the floor. The following results, therefore, have to do with alteration in the medium's weight due to such motions. It is to be remembered that if the particular movement of the table desired by the experimenter was a possible one, it was almost always immediately given by the operators on request.

Experiment 7: The effect on the medium's weight of levitated table jerking vertically up and down in the air.

The table used was No. 1 (the ordinary seance table).

Method. — The medium being seated quietly on the weighing-machine with hands on knees as in Experiment 2, I asked for steady levitation of the table, which was immediately given. The weight of the medium + chair + drawingboard before levitation was 9 st. 4 lb. During the period of steady levitation the combined weight was 10 st. 0 lb. 8 oz. Having balanced the machine at this, I asked the operators to jerk the table (which up to then was steadily levitated) vertically upwards into the air. This they at once did, the table rising quickly from 6 in. to 8 in. into the air. I asked them

4.

to do it several times. The result was always the same. At each upward jerk of the table the steelyard of the weighing-machine rose and pressed against the top stop and then returned to its position of balance.

I also asked the operators to let the table slowly sag vertically in the air, and to arrest its motion suddenly before it reached the floor. This they did several times. I found that this motion also synchronised with instantaneous and temporary increase of the medium's weight in addition to the increased weight due to steady levitation.

Conclusion. — When the table is steadily levitated, the medium's weight is increased by an amount practically equal to the weight of the table. If the table is jerked up and down in the air, there is an additional instantaneous weight on the medium while the jerking is proceeding.

Experiment 8: The purpose was as in Experiment 7.

Method. — As in Experiment 7.

The table used was the ordinary seance table.

The date of the experiment was some months later than the date of Experiment 7.

While the table was being jerked up and down in the air, a temporarily increased weight (above that required for steady levitation) was on the medium.

Experiment 9: The purpose was as in Experiment 7.

Method. — As in Experiment 7.

The table used was No. 4, the stool.

The stool being steadily levitated, I asked the operators to move it vertically up and down in the air, which they did. The lever of the weighing-machine, previously balanced for increased weight of medium due to steady levitation, went up against top stop in synchronism, fell to bottom stop, rose to top stop again, and so on during the period of time in which the stool was in motion. The result was identical with the results of Experiments 7 and 8, although there was one point of variation in the method which was noticeable. It was this: the motion of the seance table (weight 10 lb. 6 oz.) caused vigorous temporary movements of the steelyard against the stops, while the motion of the stool (weight 2 lb. 12 oz.) caused movements which, although quite apparent, were feeble in comparison.

Besides the cases given in Experiments 7, 8, and 9, I have often at other times during my experimental work observed the effect on the medium's weight of tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 moving up and down vertically in the air. The result in all such cases was as stated above.

The following results arose out of the very complete Experiment 4. They were observed before and after the main results were obtained.

Each was carefully verified at the time and on many subsequent occasions. I am designating each particular observation a separate experiment for the purpose of facilitating references.

Experiment 10: Movement of table along the floor.

At the commencement of the levitation experiments, the position of the table (No. 1) within the circle as I had placed it evidently did not suit the operators, for it was gently pulled along the floor until apparently the exact place desired was reached. The medium was at the time seated on the weighing-machine with hands on knees and body perfectly still, and the steelyard was balanced for her dead weight, weight of chair and of drawing-board. While the gentle shifting of the table was in progress, the steelyard rose up against the top stop and remained there while the movement was going on, and fell as soon as it was over. This indicated, of course, that during the movement of the table along the floor the medium's weight underwent an increase. By my sense of touch on the end of the steelyard I judged that the increase of weight on the medium was from 3 to 4 lb., which would be about the magnitude of the force required to move the table along the floor against friction.

Experiment 11: Various movements of table.

The table used was the ordinary seance one (weight 10 ]b. 6 oz.). I placed it on the floor within the circle. Having balanced the weighing-machine at the value due to the weight of mediunH- chair + drawing-board, I asked the operators to produce various movements of the table from slight shiftings and tiltings up to full levitation, in order to enable me to note roughly the effects on the medium's weight. Results were as follows: —

{a) Table tilted steadily on two legs (two legs on the floor and two in the air): medium's weight increased.

(h) Table tilted higher than in (a): alteration in amount of increased weight.

(c) Table tilted with three legs in the air and

one on the floor: further alteration in amount of increased weight.

For (a), (b), and (c) I did not read the values of the amount of additional weight on the medium, due to the tiltings, on the scale of the steelyard, but I balanced the steelyard on each occasion with the rider. None of these additional amounts of weight reached the magnitude of the weight of the table.

(d) The table was given translational movements

along the floor; it was also moved rotationally 30 degrees or so over the floor: in all these cases the weight of the

medium was increased during the time of the movement.

Conclusion. — It is certain that each movement of the table produces increased weight on the medium, whether it be levitation, partial levitation, or movement along the floor; and with regard to movements which require a psychic opposition to the force of gravity, the increased weight may be anything up to the approximate weight of the table, according to the degree of levitation, whether it be partial or complete.

Experiment 12: Inference that levitation is in progress by observing the weighingmachine.

Having set the weighing-machine to balance at the dead weight of medium + chair -}- drawingboard, I several times purposely kept my eyes away from the table and fixed them on the steelyard of the machine. As soon as the steelyard rose against the top stop I would look around and either find the table levitated or partly levitated; i.e. by observing when increased weight was on the medium I was always certain by that fact alone to find a levitation in progress.

Experiment 13: Table tilted on two legs.

On one occasion, at the end of a seance, the operators unexpectedly tilted the seance table on two legs and kept it in that position for a minute or so while the closing prayer was being

pronounced. As the medium was at the time seated on the weighing-machine, I noticed that her weight, as evidenced by the steelyard pressing up tightly against top stop, was greatly increased, although I did not take the amount of the increase.

To find the effect on the medium's weight when the table was moved along the floor in given directions: —

Experiment 14: The table pulled along the floor towards medium.

Having balanced weight of medium, chair, and drawing-board as in previous experiments, I asked the operators to gently pull in the table directly towards medium.

Result. — While table was moving in towards medium from somewhere near the centre of the circle, the steelyard rose and kept pressed against the top stop, thus indicating that during that time her weight was increased.

Experiment 15: The table pushed along the floor directly away from medium.

The operators at request moved the table gently along the floor directly away from medium.

Result. — As in Experiment 14, a continuous increase of weight of medium during the progress of the movement.

The general conclusion from Experiments 6 to 15 seems to be that all motions of the table

whatever along the floor and all movements of the table in the air cause temporary increase of the medium's weight. In other words, forces which would be required in the ordinary way to accomplish these movements are reflected somehow or other on the body of the medium.

The Distance of the 3Iediiim from the Table. — I have already mentioned (Experiment 10) that the distance of the table from the medium seems to be an important factor during levitation. It is a mistake to assume that the closer the medium to the table the easier and quicker will the phenomenon occur. There seems to be a critical distance at which the best result takes place. For, under the mistaken notion that the closer the medium the better the result, I contracted the circle on several occasions when I required extra-powerful phenomena, i.e. I diminished the diameter of the circle by making the members sit closer together. But before any table phenomena occurred, the medium's chair (with the medium on it) was pulled or pushed back bodily along the floor for a distance of about a foot. This extraordinary phenomenon I have witnessed on many occasions. It tempts one to ask where the reaction can possibly be in such a case. I hope some time in the future to investigate it more fully.

On other occasions, with the normal diameter of circle, if the table happened to be too close to, or too far from, the medium, it would be pulled along the floor until the distance for levitation

was apparently correct. I have witnessed this preHminary movement of the table along the floor dozens of times; in fact, it is not too much to say that it takes place just previously to every levitation, for the experimenter, when he places the table on the floor, hardly ever seems to strike the exact place desired by the operators. As small a distance as an inch or two seems to make a difference.

I was rather amused on one occasion when I was engaged on some rather delicate levitation experiments. I was inside the circle as usual, and, thinking from long experience that the table was not just in the proper spot for the phenomenon, I moved it to the left for a distance of about six inches. No sooner had I done so than it was moved back by the operators to its original position. I thoughtlessly shifted it over again, and instantly it was again moved back. The fact was, of course, that the table happened in the first instance to be in the exact position desired by the operators, a thing which very seldom happened.

Conclusions. — There is a critical distance in front of the medium, neither too close to her nor too far from her, at which levitation of the table occurs. If the distance is in the first instance incorrect, the table itself is moved by the operators if the disposition of the circle allows of it; and if the disposition of the sitters does not allow of it, the medium and her chair are moved back bodily.

The Height of the Levitation. — The height to which a levitated table rises above the floor is important from several points of view. As in the case of the distance of the table from the medium, there appears also to be a critical height, which I should put, by rough estimation, at about 8 in. from the floor, whereat the expenditure of psychic energy is a minimum; for if levitation is asked for, 1 have noticed that the distance mentioned is about the usual rise given, at any rate with tables weighing from 6 to 10 lb. But if a specially high levitation is demanded, or if the operators are giving an ordinary general demonstration, on which occasions they seem to desire to produce the most spectacular results possible, the height may be greatly increased, especially towards the end of the seance. On such occasions I have seen the surface of the table shoulder-high. However, with high levitations there is not such a degree of steadiness as with low ones, the table generally twisting about with slow and sinuous motions this way and that. If we call the critical height about 8 in. for the ordinary seance table (as it appears to be), i.e. the height at which a steady levitation can occur with surface of table approximately level, then I have often noticed that if I ask, say for experimental purposes, a higher levitation than this, the operators seem to have to put forth a distinct eiFort. If success results, the table is jerked, not slowly raised, to the height demanded, and during the time it is at this

extra height abnormal effort on the part of the operators seems to be necessary. The highest levitation I have ever seen was about 4 ft., which was the rise on one occasion in the case of table 4 (the stool, Experiment 4). It is certain that there is a maximum height beyond which levitation cannot occur; that maximum, so far as 1 have observed, being, as mentioned, about 4 ft. above the floor.

I have observed all sorts of freak levitations. For instance, on one occasion when the table had been levitated for about three minutes with the bottom of the legs about level with the knees of the sitters, the surface commenced gradually to incline about a horizontal axis, and continued to do so until it was nearly vertical; then the table moved over, in the air, to the chair where I was sitting, rested the lower edge of its surface on my knees, and then moved back and dropped to the floor.

Conclusion. — There seems to be a critical height at which the operators can produce most easily levitation of the table — or at anyrate a height at which they can obtain the steadiest and most prolonged form of the levitation. Anything above that height is a distinct effort.

Chapter IV — Some Miscellaneous Experiments, Observations, And Calculations

Eooperimcnt 16: Observation of levitation with calculation of upward pressure on under surface to account for it.

The table used was the ordinary seance one. Top surface 24 in. x 17 in.; height 2 ft. 5 in.; weight 10½ lb.; material, deal (see Chapter III.).

Time. — Near opening of seance, with psychic energy not fully developed.

Commencement of Levitation. — Table shook, rose on two legs, dropped and rose on the other two, dropped and rose on one, fell back on two, jerked rapidly about, and finally rose unevenly but completely into the air, the end which was lower being continually pushed upwards in order, apparently, to get the surface level. After a little time the jerking ceased and table remained practically level and stationary in the air at a height of about 12 in. from the floor.

Duration of Levitation. — 4 minutes 30 seconds, during about 4 minutes of which time the table

remained almost immovable in the air, a result evidently desired by the operators as indicative of their ability to maintain steady magnitude and direction of the psychic force. During the first minute the time was taken by calling out the seconds, one, two, three, etc., by guesswork, and for the remaining 3½ minutes or so by a watch; the error may amount to a few seconds.

The Psychic Pressure. — The table during the greater portion of the levitation was practically stationary in the air, with its surface nearly level. If we assume that the levitation is effected by a uniform upward pressure on the under surface, we may make the following calculations: —

Weight of table.. =10flb.

Area of under surface of table = 24 in. x 17 in.

= 408 sq. in. Psychic pressure (approx.) =10fH-408

= '025 lbs. per sq. in.

This is of course quite a small pressure, and would be somev/hat difficult to detect by mechanical means. For the sake of argument 1 am assuming that the pressure would be of the fluid type, though it is apparent that such a supposition is practically unthinkable. There is, moreover, good experimental reason to believe that the pressure, whatever its nature, is not applied to the table uniformly, but more or less over only a part of the under surface, evidenced, for instance, by the upward jerks given at any required corner during the commencement of levitation. Again, the pressure may be applied at two or three places on the under surface, or the single area over which it is exerted may be capable of altering its location on the under surface in order to get the resultant under the centre of gravity. Or again, there may be no force on the under surface at all, and the table may in that case be supported by an upward force under each leg (although this hypothesis is rather extravagant), or it may be held in position in the air by rods projecting from the medium and gripping some part of the legs; or the levitation may even be brought about by an upward force from the top surface of the table. I mention all these suppositions so that the reader will understand I am not making assumptions light-heartedly. Each of them will be examined later on. Meanwhile the most reasonable hypothesis seems to be that there is some kind of an upward force below the surface of table, and it is useful to make calculations accordingly.

Experiment 17: Observation of levitation with calculation of upward pressure on under surface to account for it.

The seance was held in my own house, in the drawing-room.

The table used was a square-topped one with four curved legs, with a lower surface near the bottom of the legs. During the evening it was levitated many times, the longest period being

certainly well over a minute (although I did not time it).

Weight of table.. = 16 lb. Dimensions of top surface = 20 in. x 20 in. Height....= 2 ft. 5 in.

The psychic upward pressure, assuming it to be uniform as in the previous case, would then be

16 -4- (20x20) = 16½400

= '04 lb. per sq. in.

It is therefore seen from the calculations that if we assume a uniform upward pressure on under surface of such tables as I have used in my experiments, the magnitude of that pressure is in all cases quite small, which fact I have found of some importance in working out the theory of levitation. The 16-lb. table of this test is the heaviest I have used during any of my experiments.

Experiment 18: Muscular force applied vertically downwards on top of levitated table.

During one of the levitations referred to in Experiment 17, near the conclusion of the sitting (with psychic energy therefore at a maximum), and with the surface of the table nearly shoulderhigh in the air, I entered the circle and pressed down with my hands on the top of the table. Although I exerted all my strength, I could not depress the table to the floor. A friend who is over six feet in height then leaned over

the circle and helped me to press downwards, when our combined efforts exerted to the limit just caused it to touch the floor. The kind of resistance encountered was an elastic one.

The table then stood up on two legs (with two legs in the air), and I used all my muscular force in an endeavour to depress the raised end, but I was quite unable to do so. It seemed as though a cushion of compressed air were below the raised portion.

It will be noticed that the levitation I have described in Experiment 16 occurred near the commencement of the seance, and that there was a considerable amount of preliminary jerking and jumping about of the table before true levitation took place {i.e. the whole table at rest in the air, with no part of it in contact with the floor or with any solid body whatsoever). According to my observations extending over two years, during which time I have seen hundreds of levitations under all conditions, levitations near the commencement of the sitting are nearly always of that type. It would seem that the psychic energy is not fully developed for half an hour or so after the opening, or at anyrate that the operators cannot work so easily as they can at a later period of the sitting. About an hour from the commencement I have on many occasions had a series of ideal levitations, with no initial jerks or movements of any kind whatsoever. It would seem that in such cases the operators had their adjustments accurate and complete, and that they did not require any preliminary trials such as are common at the beginning of the seance.

The following is an exact account of ideal levitations I have on several occasions obtained near the conclusion of seances, with all conditions for the production of the phenomenon at their best, the mental harmony of the sitters perfect, their bodily health good, and all things seeming to flow with everybody and everything in the manner they sometimes do: —

(1) The table is stationary on the floor within

the circle.

(2) I enter the circle and sit down beside the

table.

(3) I utter the word " Rise " (or equivalent word

or words).

(4) The table almost immediately rises three or

four inches vertically into the air, without jerk or side movement or " fuss " of any kind, and remains fixed there without sensible motion (though doubtless there are a few unnoticed tremors).

(5) At the conclusion of the experiment, lasting

perhaps half a minute, I utter the word " Fall " (or equivalent word or words).

(6) The table sinks gently to the floor.

(7) The processes (1) to (6) may be gone through

half a dozen times in succession at intervals of a minute or two.

The reason for the instant response to the

words "Rise" and "Fall" was because of previous arrangement with the operators, with the idea, on both sides, of economising words and explanations.

Experiment 19: The two kinds of resistance for a levitated table.

The table used was the one referred to in Experiment 17, and the seance took place in my own house. During one of the powerful levitations I entered the circle and stood over the table. Endeavouring to press it down vertically to the floor, I felt an elastic resistance, as already described. I then thought of pushing it inwards towards the medium. I was much surprised to find that the resistance to push in that direction was not an elastic one, but one of quite a different order. The resistance was a solid or rigid one, and, as a matter of fact, the table appeared to be "locked." As the results of this experiment are so important in the theory of levitation, it is necessary that the reader should be perfectly certain as to what I mean.

In fig. 3, M is the medium, and T the levitated table. If the observer stands over the table and presses down in the direction A, he experiences a perfectly elastic resistance. If he presses in direction B, he experiences a solid and unyielding resistance. The actual direction of B I have not determined. It is not parallel to the surface of the table, but is downwards and inwards at some angle approximating to that shown. The

N

direction probably varies somewhat with the height of the levitation. So soHd and unyielding is the resistance in this direction that it gave me the impression that steel bars were connecting the table with the medium, and that T was pushing along the longitudinal axes of such bars.

Eooperiment 20: Another test for the unyielding resistance of levitated table.

The table used was the ordinary seance one. I pressed inwards in a direction approximating to B (fig. 3), and again experienced the rigid type of resistance. It felt exactly as though I was pushing against a solid rod which had gripped the table from the body of the medium.

Experiment 21: Overturning table to floor and raising it again.

The table used was the ordinary seance one. For ordinary experimental work it stands on the floor with its long edge parallel to the front of the body of the medium. The operators were asked to overturn it on to its side and to raise it into its normal position again. They first shifted the table round until its short edge was more or less parallel to the front of the body of the medium, and then they gently tipped it up on two legs and gradually turned it about these two legs until it lay on its side on the floor. The whole thing was done quietly and without fuss. Then the opposite process commenced. The operators endeavoured to raise the table

into its normal position. But it was obvious this process was a difficult one, and there was nothing gentle about it, the table being given, apparently at the lower edge, what appeared to be sudden shoves and pushes, most of which were not successful or only partly successful (in the latter case the edge was only raised a little from the floor). Finally a shove more powerful than the others, or delivered at a better spot, accomplished what was required, and the table was again upright and standing on its four legs.

I have noticed that the table is, in this experiment, almost invariably turned over to the floor towards the left hand of the medium. I think there is a reason for choosing the left hand which I will refer to later on. I have observed the experiment at least a dozen times, and I saw it also on one occasion in my own house. We had formed an impromptu circle in a corner of the room. Only three members of the circle were present, including the medium. My wife, a young lady friend, and myself made up the circle, and a light bamboo table was placed in the centre. After a series of levitations, knocks, and so on, the table was turned over by the operators on its side, shifted about the floor until it was evidently just in the position required, then given one big heave which placed it upright on its feet. In this case there were no preliminary pushes or abortive shoves, for one movement accomplished the whole process.

Experiment 22: Increased and decreased weight of table standing on the floor.

While the table was standing on the floor, I asked the operators to increase its weight. This they immediately did, for on trying to lift it I found it impossible or nearly impossible to do so. The table seemed to be glued to the floor. Likewise, on asking the operators to reduce the table's weight 1 found I could lift it by a muscular eflbrt of a few ounces. That is, the operators can apparently increase or decrease the weight of the table at will.

Experiment 23: Table levitated upside down.

This levitation was accomplished at the conclusion of a seance at which I was carrying out some experiments on phosphorescence, fluorescence, etc., for which purpose the room had been made perfectly dark. The levitation was therefore in complete darkness. So powerful was the levitating force that the table actually turned over and rose nearly a couple of feet into the air upside down, with the legs sticking upwards. I and three members of the circle each grasped a leg, and we tried to depress the table to the floor, but found it perfectly impossible. Furthermore, the table moved up and down and to and fro in the air with such powerful motions that we, who had hold of it, might as well have tried to stop the movements of a locomotive.

Experiment 24: Table on floor upside down. Visitor invited to raise it.

The ordinary seance-table, weight 10½ lb., was used. It was placed on the floor upside down, and a muscular visitor to the circle was asked to catch hold of the legs and to raise it; he was unable to do so. I do not think I have seen anybody yet succeed in this attempt, and I have watched many try. The table seems to be glued to the floor, or to be held to the floor by some kind of suction between surface and floor, although this is not the correct explanation, as I shall attempt to show later on. This little test is really a most remarkable one, and most important and helpful in the forming of a satisfactory theory.

Experiment 25: Movements of table with experimenter sitting on it.

The table was standing on the floor. I sat upon it. The table was slid and jerked about the floor apparently with considerable ease, against obviously fairly large friction forces. I have seen many people other than myself sit upon the table and be thus moved about. A favourite experiment is to ask the visitor to sit steadily upon the table and to await calmly what shall happen. In a short time, usually inside a minute, the table gently rises on two legs and slides him ofl' to the floor.

Ki

Experiment 26: Position in which tiie operators like the table to be placed when they desire to exert the greatest psychic force possible on it.

I have watched the following process on many occasions. A visitor enters the circle and lays hold of the table, and is told by the sitters to do all he can to prevent it moving. If he is very muscular he may succeed for half a minute or so in preventing motion; but sooner or later, usually sooner, the table eludes him and gets into motion, jerking this way and that, levitating and dancing about in the air, and so on, and this in spite of the greatest restraining force he can exert.

Now, when such a visitor enters the circle, what usually happens is that the table, before he touches it, or by its first movement after he touches it, rises on the two legs remote from the medium and at an angle of about 40 degrees to the horizontal. It remains in this position for perhaps ten seconds, and then immediately afterwards the tussle begins. This preliminary rising on two legs at the stated angle is no mere chance movement. It has a deep significance.

In fig. 4, M represents the medium and T the table tilted as explained. Does it not seem possible, nay, almost probable, that the reason for the initial tilt is to allow some projection from the medium to get the best grip possible

