Thought Transference: A Critical and Historical Review of the Evidence for Telepathy, with a Record of New Experiments 1902-1903

Thomas, Northcote W. — Tilford reading edition

THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE: A CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE FOR TELEPATHY, WITH A RECORD OF NEW EXPERIMENTS 1902-1903

by Northcote W. Thomas (N. W. Thomas)

* * *

Basis: Clean reading edition of N. W. Thomas's 1905 book, Internet Archive cu31924028953879 (Cornell University Library scan); spelling and wording original; running heads, folios and scanner noise removed.

Reader note: Northcote W. Thomas's 1905 survey is a critical, even-handed stock-taking of the evidence for telepathy/thought-transference as it stood after twenty years of Society for Psychical Research work — historical cases, experimental methods and their pitfalls, and his own new experiments of 1902-1903 reported in full. It is presented here as Thomas made it, for the reader to judge; the editor endorses neither his conclusions nor his critics. POD saturation for this title is thinner than for the classic SPR texts, which is part of why it is reprinted here.

Rare & Obscure Books series

* * *

THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

Thought Transference

A Critical and Historical Review of

the Evidence for Telepathy, with

a Record of New Experiments

1902-1903

By

NORTHCOTE W. THOMAS, M.A.

Author of "Crystal Gazing"

ALEXANDER MORING LIMITED

THE DE LA MORE PRESS

32 GEORGE STREET HANOVER SQUARE LONDON W.

1905

Butler & Tanner,

The Selwood Printing Works.

Frome, and London.

PREFACE

Since the foundation of the Society for Psychical Research more than twenty-three years ago, a great mass of more or less well-evidenced material has been published upon subjects such as thought-transference, crystal gazing, ghosts, mediumship, physical phenomena and other so-called " occult " manifestations. There have, however, been but few attempts to sum up the evidence and make it available for the ordinary citizen who cannot find time to read the whole of the thirty volumes published by the Society. Even in the Society's own publications there is, as a rule, no periodical summing up of the evidence for the various phenomena and hypotheses.

I propose, therefore, to discuss Psychical Research or Metapsychics, as Professor Richet terms it, in a series of works which will deal critically but sympathetically with the evidence. Where the historical and anthropological facts are of interest or importance, they will not be neglected, but my main purpose is to show what a reasonable

man without bias in either direction may regard as proved.

The ignorant criticism to which the Society was subjected in its earlier days has given place in many quarters to an equally uncritical acceptance of its results; but neither the credulity nor the scepticism of the public is based on knowledge. Denial and affirmation are both equally easy, when the authors of the sentiment know nothing of the question at issue. I hope to provide a series of text books which will render both scepticism and credulity less excusable.

I am much indebted to the various ladies and gentlemen whose trials are chronicled in the latter half of this volume, for assistance in experiments which are too often neither interesting nor successful. At the time of going to press I have lost sight of some of them, and their initials only are given in the absence of express permission to give the full names.

I am also indebted to the Council of the Society for Psychical Research for permission to quote from the Proceedings and Journal, and especially for the right of publishing the unprinted results of the experiments tried in 1901-2, the records of which are now in my possession.

NORTHCOTE W. THOMAS.

April, 1905.

CONTENTS

CHAP. PAGE.

I Incredulity, Scientific and Otherwise — Action at a Distance — The Qualifications of a Psychical Researcher — Dr. W. B. Carpenter — What is Science? — Objections to Psychical Research: its Assumptions: its Devotees: its Sphere of Enquiry i

II Telepathy a Designation, not a Theory —

Possible Errors... -25

III The Subliminal — Ordinary Sense Perception — Hypnotic Hallucinations — Trance — Clairvoyance.. -33

iv how we become aware of subliminal ideas — Mental Impressions — Visions and Hallucinations — Automatic Writing 5 1

V Historical — The Magnetizers — Spiritualism — The Newnham Experiments — Experiments by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, Professor Sidgwick and others. 62

VI Experiments at a Distance — Transference of Images — Telepathic Hallucinations......82

VII Telepathic Hypnotism — Telepathic

Dreams...... 106

VIII Experiments in 1902 — Pictures — Colours

— Diagrams..... 1 27

CHAP. PAGE

IX Card Experiments — Independent Variables — Trials in same room — Postponed Successes — Cyclic Guessing — Trials in different rooms...154

X The Net Result — Future Investigation. 175

XI The Ethics of Criticism — Problems — Theories — Objections — Mind and Matter — Psychophysical Parallelism

— The Ignorance of Science — Basis of Belief that Language conveys Ideas 182

XII How to Experiment... 205

Bibliography....211

Index... 213

CHAPTER I

Incredulity, scientific and otherwise — Action at a distance — The qualifications of a psychical researcher — Dr. W. B. Carpenter — What is science? — Objections to Psychical Research: its assump*i tions: its devotees: its sphere of enquiry.

Some things appear to us impossible because of the range of our knowledge. Few sane persons with a competent knowledge of physics will set out on a quest for perpetual motion. If by any chance such a person does do so, and believes that he has solved the problem, it is possible to demonstrate to him that his theoretical solution conflicts with established principles, and is therefore erroneous. 1 In other cases well-attested reports of phenomena are disbelieved, not because the statements contradict any positive knowledge, but by reason of the extent of our ignorance. Globular lightning was long regarded as impossible, not because it conflicted with any known facts, but

i A Cambridge wrangler was reported to have solved the problem some twenty years ago. The only defect in his solution was its omission to take account of the fact that gravity acts downwards.

because it was unlike any form of electric discharge that could be experimentally produced. As soon as it was shown that something analogous could be demonstrated in the laboratory, there was a change of view as to the value of the evidence previously accumulated.

In 1882 a Society, whose name is now a household word, was formed to conduct " an examination into the nature and extent of any influence which may be exerted by one mind upon another, apart from any generally recognized mode of perception," and for other objects. The Society for Psychical Research during the first ten years of its existence devoted its energies in the main to the question of thought transference or telepathy, spontaneous and experimental. Since that time the study of these questions has on the whole been overshadowed by investigations into trance mediumship — a line of research more attractive to the outside world, as well as to the spiritualistic section of the Society, but hardly calculated to be fruitful without at least a preliminary disproof of the existence of thought transference or a determination of its limits between living persons.

Since the experiments conducted in 1889 and 1890 by the late Prof. Sidgwick, Mrs. Sidgwick and others, no long series of trials has been published by the Society. Virtually no fresh evidence

has therefore been accumulated, and in view of the experience of the possibilities of error gained since the childhood of the Society this failure to accumulate new evidence cannot but throw some doubt on results which at the time seemed almost conclusive. This doubt must in fact gain strength from the conclusive character of the evidence published in Proc. S.P.R. vi, 128; viii. 560, sq. If the Society has, in the twelve years which have elapsed, failed to obtain, in a series of any length, results that were above probability, or so much above probability as to exclude chance variations as a probable explanation, we can either conclude that the perceptual faculty is rarely possessed in the degree to which the Brighton percipients of 1889 and 1890, chosen, it appears, at random, possessed it, or we can perhaps with more reason conclude that there was some serious undetected flaw in the method of experimentation.

The purpose of the following pages is, in the first place, to give a brief sketch of the evidence so far available for experimental thought transference, and, in the second place, to indicate the lines on which those who have no special claim to acquaintance with the sources of error in psychological investigation, and who do not regard themselves as more favoured than their fellows in the direction of divining the thoughts of other people, may profit-

ably (to science, if not to themselves) experiment, and to show in what respect such experiments, attended with but slight success, though they may be, from the point of view of those who regard thought transference as a fact to be proved by experimentation with exceptional individuals, may do more to establish the theory on a sound basis than all the more sensational work of previous investigators.

It has been pointed out above that there are two kinds of incredulity — one, which may be termed scientific, refuses to accept any evidence, however good in quality and quantity, which would, if accepted, involve the assumption that two contra-dictory statements can both be true. The other, which is pure prejudice and merely an example of scientific superstition, refuses to accept any evidence, however good in quality or quantity, as to facts or alleged facts, for no other reason than that they cannot be brought into line with, and shown to be analogous to, one or more accepted facts. In so saying, I do not, of course, include the sane scepticism which refuses to accept statements not backed up by sufficient evidence, 1 but only that attitude of mind which is so satisfied with its supposed

1 The question of what is sufficient evidence is a difficult matter and need not be discussed here.

knowledge of the universe, as to be able to inform humanity that no evidence can be sufficient, that experiments in such matters are mere folly, and that no results can be anticipated from them (vide Nature, vol. 24, p. 172). The irrational character of this attitude is apparent, when we reflect that were it logically adhered to, no evidence would suffice to convince us of the existence of any isolated fact in nature, however many observations were available. We might for example deny the existence of gravitation because it is the only force which appears to be independent in its manifestation of either time or space.

The scientific world (or certain members of it), has declared telepathy to be an impossibility; it has done this on the ground that action at a distance is impossible, and that therefore no hypothesis which involves it is worth consideration. With regard to these assertions, it may be noted that it is very far from proved that action at a distance is impossible. At most, what has been proved is that no action hitherto observed is action at a distance, and even this statement might require to be qualified in the case of gravitation, if not of other forces. However that may be, any one who maintains that action at a distance cannot be a fact because it has not yet been discovered, is no more advanced than the labourer, who, on seeing a steam-engine at work

for the first time, concluded that there was a horse inside it because that was the only kind of non-human force that he knew. The savage and the scientist are not so far from one another as some people imagine.

It is, however, very far from proved that telepathy any more than gravitation involves action at a distance. It is, indeed, difficult to conceive how the vibration of a physical medium can transmit thought; but this is no more an objection to the view that it does do so, than is the impossibility of bridging the gulf from molceular motion to consciousness a refutation of the hypothesis that the brain is the organ of mind. We may reasonably go on to ask by what kind of reasoning it has been proved that consciousness is localized in the brain. A physicist tells us that a charge of electricity appears to be localized on the surface of a con-ductor, but is really distributed in space round it. We have absolutely no grounds for supposing that the same may not be true of consciousness. All arguments to the contrary assume that absence of sensation (I mean thereby, absence of one of the ordinarily recognized five sorts of sensation conveyed by definite nerves and under normal circumstances, definitely localized) is equivalent to absence of consciousness and that consciousness,. so far as it is feeling, is the sum of the feelings

conveyed by the nervous system. 1 This, however, is the very point at issue and cannot be assumed unless experiments devised to that end (which may be, as a matter of fact, impossible to conceive, or carry out) have proved that no such " distribution " of consciousness occurs.

We may again ask in what sense it can be said that consciousness is localized at all. We are, of course, made aware by our senses only of vibrations that impinge on the nerve ends, or in other words, impulses that directly affect the body. But that is no proof that localization can be intelligibly attributed to consciousness. If we are only conscious of heat or cold when the surface of the body is at a different temperature from its surroundings, that is no proof that our consciousness is at a temperature of g8'5°. To put the matter in another form, consciousness is certainly, so far as introspection tells us anything, non-spatial. We cannot therefore object to inquire into the possibility of one consciousness influencing another, through other than the recognized modes of sensation, on the ground that such influence necessarily involves action at a distance; spatial nearness and distance are mean-

1 On this question the experiments in clairvoyance are of interest, by which I mean experiments such as those tried by Professor Richet (Proc. S.P.R.), to determine how far it is possible to guess cards drawn at random and unseen by any one.

ingless as applied to our own consciousness and do not necessarily apply to the relation of our own • to other consciousnesses. The argument that telej pathy involves action at a distance in this case falls to the ground.

Objections of this class fail, moreover, for the simple reason that no generalization from the facts of experience can exclude the possibility of other facts not inconsistent with the previously ascertained facts. That knowledge ordinarily and habitually comes to us one way no more excludes the possibility of its coming in an entirely different way, than the practically instantaneous discharge of electricity under ordinary circumstances excludes the possibility of globular lightning and other slow dis-charges. Congruent observations by competent") observers must be accepted as prima facie evidence C until definite sources of error are demonstrated. I

This brings us to a second point. It is frequently argued that the proper persons to take up thought transference are physiologists, and that those who have no knowledge of the phenomena of brain or of mind are incompetent. It may be pointed out that no physiologist who ever lived could explain by means of physiology how we think at all. If the idea " cat " is associated with a certain molecular arrangement in the brain, all the professors in the world cannot tell us why it should be so associated,

nor even tell us with what arrangement of the molecules of the brain the idea " cat " is associated. As thought transference deals with ideas, the physiologist is clearly no use, so far as explanations are concerned, though so far as physiologists are more likely to exclude errors and to experiment in the most scientific way possible, their work on the question of telepathy is desirable. But to argue that because a man has investigated the mechanism of the nerves or the minute structure of the brain, he is better qualified to discover the causes of certain states of mind, is an obvious absurdity. It does not follow that a physicist who understands the mathematics of the question will be a better shot than a gamekeeper or a poacher. Nor does it follow that a man whose experience has been with microscopes will be successful in dealing with the medium. The sole point on which his knowledge, as distinguished from his skill as an experimenter, will be useful is on the question of how far hyperes-thesia in the normal or the hypnotised subject can explain the phenomena and, perhaps, what precaution should be taken to exclude the possibility of it. Otherwise a physiologist is not necessarily of so much use as a phonographer. For under proper conditions of experimentation the sole question is, " Did the mental phenomena of the agent show a relation, not to be explained as the result of chance,

to THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

to the mental phenomena of the percipient? " Given an accurate record of the psychical states of each, and it does not matter a halfpenny, so far as the proof, as distinguished from the explanation of telepathy goes, what their brain states are. For the benefit of those, however, who put their faith in the physiologist, it may be pointed out that, as a matter of fact, more than one person to whom more than common knowledge in such matters is attributed has investigated the question of thought transference and that their researches have not been unattended with success. As an example I may cite Professor Richet, details of whose experiments in hypnotism at a distance are to be found in Proc. S.P.R., v. 32, sq.; Revue Phil. xxv. 435.

A curious commentary on the alleged super-excellence of physiologists as investigators in these matters is supplied by a letter of the arch enemy of spiritualism, telepathy, et hoc genus omne, the late Dr. W. B. Carpenter, in Nature, June 30, 1881, p. 188. He had given a testimonial of a sort to the " thought reader," W. I. Bishop, and here narrates an experiment, showing that " we may be guided in our choice among things " indifferent " by influences of which we are ourselves unconscious" The experiment was this: the subject drew a card from a pack, identified it, and returned it; the pack was shuffled and sixteen cards dealt by the agent, face down-

DR. CARPENTER n

wards in four rows; the subject then selected a row. According to Dr. Carpenter the selected row was to be taken away, it could not therefore, if the experiment was to be successful, contain the selected card; but this is a point on which some doubt is permissible. Three rows when selected in this manner and three cards of the remaining row, and the last card, on being turned up, was identical with the card originally selected. This experiment was performed with success before Dr. Carpenter three successive times, he himself being the subject on the last occasion. The selection of rows or cards was, in each case, made by the subject with his right hand, which Mr. Bishop held in his left, and Dr. Carpenter held that the influence was unconsciously conveyed by this means.

The explanation suggested by Dr. Carpenter is not very convincing, and an ardent believer in telepathy might be disposed to regard telepathic influence as a more likely hypothesis. We need not, however, go so far afield. The theory of Dr. Carpenter implies that Mr. Bishop knew which card had been selected; this of itself involves, if the trial is always successful, both trickery and some amount of conjuring; for in Dr. Carpenter's report we are not given to understand that any means were openly taken to secure that the selected card should be among those dealt; and even if such means were

taken there would be nothing to show which was the card in question. But given this amount of deception, it is not apparent why we should hold that the remainder of the trick was performed in the way suggested by Mr. Bishop and accepted by Dr. Carpenter. In the first place, we do not learn that any precautions were taken to secure that the experiment was tried with an ordinary pack; the simplest way would obviously be to try it with one made up of fifty-two cards all alike, the company being allowed to inspect a second pack of the ordinary kind. If this was not the case, it remains to be proved that his agent did not sometimes change his formula and declare that the row or card selected was the row or card to be retained. Here again, success must obviously be certain. But even if this were not so, there is always that possibility of explaining away ill success, which is the chief resource of civilized mediums as of savage sorcerers; the agent could always declare, when the row containing the card selected had been removed, as it must frequently be, even if Mr. Bishop selected for his card a location likely to influence in his favour the choice of the subject, that the card was in the remainder of the pack, had never been on the table. We have therefore, at least three other possible explanations, none of which involve more than trickery of one sort or another, or a long study of the

DR. CARPENTER 13

principles on which the ordinary man makes three successive choices; against this latter hypothesis tell Dr. Carpenter's three successes, if they are to be regarded as anything but an exceptional series. It is possible that Dr. Carpenter's theory is the correct one; but, if this is the case, he is clearly deficient in one, or perhaps two, of the most essential qualities of a psychical researcher. Either he took no precautions against the two former of his suggested methods; or, if he did, he did not record the precautions, which may or may not have been adequate. In any case the experiments, as recorded, are valueless.

A reviewer in the Lancet, 1 with that air of supe-riority which always endears a man to his fellow searchers, is willing to admit that psychical researchers have devoted their " abilities, such as they are," to the questions they have made their own. Such an expression might seem, in the mouth of any ordinary human being, slightly ludicrous, when it is used of a society which has included among its active workers Henry Sidgwick, Oliver Lodge, F. W. H. Myers. Doubtless, if the anonymous reviewer's name were at our disposal, we should discover that his attitude is amply justified. However that may be, the analysis of Dr. Carpenter's letter given above shows that even a physiologist, who has given special 1 May 2, 1904.

and markedly hostile attention to the problems of spiritualism and thought transference and to occult questions generally, may be ludicrously at sea when he comes to deal with an investigation that would present no special features of difficulty even to the average psychical researcher, much less to the expert.

The fact is, the problems of psychical research are such, that very special training is necessary to enable even a clever man to deal with them successfully. This special training, added to general culture and an expert's acquaintance with some branch of science, provides us with the ideal psychical researcher; but, if for a special investigation there were available an acute experienced man of the world with no scientific training or an acute scientist with no special acquaintance with the problems with which he would have to deal, there can be no question but that the choice should not fall on the man of science. So much for the argument against Psychical Research which is based on the supposed inadequate education of its chief exponents.

Again, we have the objection that telepathic experiments are not such as can be repeated at will in the laboratory and that its methods and assumptions are unscientific. The chemist puts his faith in the results of his labours, because, given the

WHAT IS SCIENCE? 15

same conditions, the same result will be produced, and he, as other men of science, claims that nothing is really scientific which does not admit of similar exact experimentation. This is, however, to shut one's eyes to 'the nature of science and to the dis-tinctive characters of its branches. If we leave out of account mathematics, which, with logic, holds a peculiar position, owing to the fact that its subject matter is a pure abstraction, the sciences fall into three main groups: 1. the experimental sciences such as physics, where, in theory at any rate, all the conditions regarded as capable of influencing the result can be varied at will; 2. the observational sciences such as astronomy, where none of the conditions can be varied at will; and 3. the mixed sciences, such as biology, where certain of the factors are amenable to variation at will, but the majority are at present beyond our control. The psychologist has to deal with a mixed science; but the mere fact that a given experiment cannot be reproduced at will is no more a proof that psychology is not a. science than is the fact that the objects of the experiment may die and nip it in the bud, a proof that biology is not a science. The biologist can only select his subjects and vary the external conditions; his main business is the observation of processes over which, he has no control and of the nature of which, in some cases, such as reproduction,

r6 THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

he can form little or no idea. The bacteriologist can inject his serums and anti-toxins into selected subjects, but it is very problematical if he will always produce the desired result. And, above all, the doctor can dose his patients with medicines by the gallon and pills by the cartload and the outcome of it all is that the patient is worse and not better. Yet biology, bacteriology and medicine are regarded as sciences, pure and applied, and the experts on these subjects would feel themselves insulted if any one told them they were unscientific.

The fact is, that what distinguishes science from other branches of knowledge is neither the method nor the subject matter, but the aim with which the studies are pursued. Science is organized knowledge, and an inquiry is scientific if its object is to investigate in such a way as to arrive at general results, or results that, in combination with others, lead to general conclusions. Science must of necessity study the individual, but it does, so in order to draw conclusions as to the species. The discovery of general laws is the aim of psychical research, no less than of other investigations into the other phenomena of mind and matter. Consequently it cannot, on this head, be urged that psychical research is unscientific. Using terms loosely, we are accustomed to speak of an inquiry, a method, or, more often, of an individual inquirer,

WHAT IS SCIENCE? 17

as scientific or unscientific. By that is meant, not that the phenomena which form the subject matter of the inquiry are outside the range of science; that is, properly speaking, impossible, if the definition of science just given is correct. Scientific in this sense refers to the assumptions with which the inquirer starts, to the exactness of his methods of experimentation, and of his manner of recording the conditions and results, to the ability or incli-nation of the student to consider all the data requisite to a just judgment, and to his capacity for deducing the conclusions from those data in a logical manner. Here, too, we have no ground for denying to psychical research the name of science. Its postulates differ in no essential particular from those of other sciences. If we are justified in assuming that the chemist, for example, can properly distinguish between the changes in his laboratory, which he regards as causally connected with other changes in the same locality, and all the other manifold changes in the rest of the universe; or that he can, in other words, class certain antecedents as causes, discard others as irrelevant, and again select certain consequents as the effects of these causes, and discard others as due to other, independent, causes, it does not appear that we can condemn psychical research for postulating the same possibility of isolating causes and effects.

c

i8 THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

The charge against psychical research is, however,: not so much that its positive assumptions are mis-chievous. Its critics object that it does not assume enough. It does not assume that the postulates of physical science such as, that action at a distance is impossible — itself an unproved and unprovable hypothesis — necessarily apply to, or rather have any meaning in, the domain of psychical science. So far as this implies a readiness to consider " occult " theories in preference to explanations based on the principles to which physical science gives her adherence, it is to be censured, as is any other bias in the man of science, whose business is to go where his facts lead him. But it is clear that a bias in this direction is not a necessary part of the equip-ment of a psychical researcher. On the other hand,, if the contention be admitted that physical science, which cannot now and perhaps never will be able to give an intelligible account of the relation between mind and matter, is entitled to lay down the law as to what is possible and what is not possible in the psychical domain, we are asked to adopt an utterly unproved hypothesis, or, in other words, to set out on our investigations with a bias against a certain class of explanation. It is not the absence of bias which is demanded of us; this simple statement is enough to justify the attitude of psychical research. In the last resort the charge

WHAT IS SCIENCE? 19

against psychical research frequently resolves itself into one against the spirit of its devotees. Both its aim and its procedure may be scientific, but the average person who takes an interest in psychical research is not a psychologist and does not approach it from the psychologist's point of view. If this is a valid objection, we may with equal justice dismiss astronomy from the ranks of science, because the majority of people who look at the stars are not astronomers, or biology, because the cattle-breeder is interested in the question from a severely practical point of view, or medicine, because the interest of the layman in it is stimulated, not by a proper scientific spirit, but rather by a distressingly mundane desire to be rid of his pains. A retro-spective census would be even more effective in defeating the claims of any branch of knowledge, judged on these principles, to the name of science. But no one is asked to listen to an incompetent person who chooses to dabble in psychical research, any more than any one is bound to give a hearing to an earth flattener, or a defender of Christian Science, or any other amiable lunatic, because they deal with the same phenomena as their more rational fellow-men who go by the names of professor, F.R.S., or doctor. If the aims and methods of an individual inquirer are scientific, no amount of unscientific fellow-workers can ever make them anything else.

In conclusion, we may take note of one other objection that has been brought against psychical research — that it unwarrantably separates from the domain of psychology facts properly falling within its sphere and takes an interest in a number of phenomena which are not psychical but physical in their nature and dependent on trickery for their production. As regards the first point, the raison ffUre of all science is ultimately its utility to the human race. So far as knowledge is not useful, it comes under the head of mental gymnastics; for this kind of employment it is clearly immaterial what its subject matter is, so long as it provides sufficient scope for ingenuity. Psychology has, up to the present, shown no disposition to make its own the problems of psychical research; yet probably no one will be found to deny their importance; if it is unworthy of science to go into these questions, the most important of which is the evidence for what is generally termed immortality, or more properly for the persistence of personality afrer death, we can only feel surprise that astronomers have been permitted to prepare without rebuke the Nautical Almanac, and that men of science should be found so misguided as to believe that the task of relieving human suffering is not unworthy of a doctor.

So long as psychology considers it not only more important but its exclusive business, so far as

experiment is concerned, to determine how many-meaningless combinations of letters can be remembered and reproduced after a single perusal, or what is the smallest increment perceptible to the various senses and similar soul-absorbing questions, so long, at least, will psychical research justify her existence if no longer. But, be it noted, the kind of training which makes a man a competent psycho-physicist will not necessarily make him a good psychical researcher, though of course it will be helpful. Psychical researchers have deliberately mapped out for themselves a region into which no self-respecting man of science thought of pene-trating in earlier days, or if one was so ill advised as to do so, he quickly learnt, like Sir William Crookes, how little right — in his fellow-scientists' eyes — he had to the name of scientific inquirer. The region may be ill-mapped and pathless, but that it is so lies at the door of that science which will not investigate for itself and would forbid others to undertake on its behalf the duty of determining how far the almost universal belief in the existence of something more than a purely physical man can be justified by scientific evidence.

That psychical researchers have to deal with tricksters is, in many cases, certain and, that being so, it follows that there is nothing psychological in the facts which are, in such cases, the subject of

inquiry. But, in the first place, the facts are investigated in order to determine whether or not trickery is at the bottom of them. Psychical research can no more refuse to investigate a prima facie case, because some sage may, after the event, declare that the facts were physiological and not psychological, than geology can refuse to examine a fossil that turns out to have been produced by human agency in the twentieth century, or than geography can refuse a hearing to a de Rougemont because he subsequently turns out to be an impostor. Even were it otherwise, though it is difficult to see how any science can be denied the rights of determining what facts properly fall within the sphere, psychical research has an important work to do in delivering mankind from superstition. A detailed analysis of a fortune-teller's predictions would, if it could be brought to the notice of her possible victims, be far more effective in securing them against her wiles, than all the police prosecutions in the world. A description of the methods by which a fashionable medium contrives to delude her sitters into a belief in her super-normal powers, whether she really has any such power or not, would perhaps, as a fairly extensive experience assures me, fail to carry conviction to their habitual clients, though it might debar others from falling into their clutches. A demonstration of the rules by which, only too

often, trance and materializing mediums play upon the feelings of those who have lost friends near and dear to them, in order to make a profit out of the sorrow of the survivor and from their longing for a sign of continued existence of those who, it may be, are only gone before, would do more to uproot one of the most iniquitous traffics on the face of the earth, than all the scientific ser-monizing imaginable about the folly of spiritualism and psychical research.

We recognize that dangerous drugs should not be used except under the advice of experts, and that the investigation of their qualities and physiological effects is a task for experts only. It is a true saying, though there may be exceptions to it, that a man who is his own lawyer has a fool for his client. If the world at large recognized the truth of this as applied to psychical research, and were content to leave the work of investigation to experts, and to submit themselves, when they are the subjects of investigation, to the conditions laid down by the expert, mankind would be taken in far less frequently and the truth in these matters would be reached far sooner.

No one would expect to get the better of an average conjurer, unless he were himself an expert in prestidigitation, and even then many tricks would refuse to yield up their secrets. Experience

shows that even acute observers completely fail to give an accurate account of a seance with a conjurer. Their failure to do so renders an explanation of the trick by means of their report impossible or very nearly so. In psychological matters, likewise, everything depends upon accuracy, and accuracy is attainable only by training. It would be as reasonable to expect a botanist to conduct physical experiments with success as to look for light from the amateur in psychical research. The botanist recognizes that he is not familiar with physics but, just as the fact that economics is largely concerned with buying and selling deludes the average man into the belief that his opinion on fiscal matters is worth having, so the fact that every one is familiar with his own mental operations leads him to believe that his judgment on questions of psychology or psychical research is reliable. If the possession of a mind makes a man a psychologist, the possession of a body should make him an anato-mist and physiologist. But here the man in the street draws the line.

CHAPTER II

Telepathy a designation, not a theory — Possible errors

Telepathy (and telaesthesia, 1 or, as they might be termed, telepsychy) is frequently spoken of as a hypothesis. Except in one sense, where it is opposed to a spiritistic interpretation of certain facts, which do not concern us here, this is an error; it is not a theory, but a designation. It does not profess J:o explain how certain_r^henomena are caused, but only states that they occur and that they do not appear to be due to certain welir ecqgn ized causes, with the working of w hich the^ man of science and the man in the street are comparatively familiar. It is therefore entirely beside the mark to demand, as Professor Jastrow 2 does, a telepathic theory which does not involve concep-tions alien to physical science in the place of the hypothesis, which he conceives to have been put forward by those who have endeavoured to prove

1 Telepathy is used in the active as well as the passive sense. It might be well to disregard its etymology and restrict it to the active sense.

2 Fact and Fable in Psychology } p. 101.

experimentally the existence of thought transference, that postulates forces and a method of working J of which physics can form no conception. The Society for Psychical Research was formed to investigate, among other questions, the possibility of, or rather the evidence for, an influence of mind on mind exerted through other than the ordinary channels of the senses. The mode or modes by which such influence is exerted are provisionally termed telepathy, and the agile mind of the professional scientist seems to have scented in the word the deadly heresy of action at a distance. As a matter of fact, the term no more implies it than do the harmless, necessary telescope, telephone and telegraph. That the term does not imply action at a distance does not of course mean that it excludes it, but the evidence, if any, for telergy must necessarily be subsequent to that for telepathy. If science, for example, were ultimately compelled to accept a theory of action at a distance as an explanation of, let us say, gravitation, the fact of gravitation would, it is clear, have been established long before its explanation. In fact, to any but a professional psychologist it might seem obvious that, under ordinary mundane conditions, it is difficult to conceive of any other time relation between a fact and its explanation. It is clearly a somewhat illogical proceeding to

provide the explanation and then proceed to inquire if the fact to be explained exists. Psychical research endeavours to establish the fact of telepathy and might well be prepared to leave the explanation of it to future generations. This attitude, of course, by no means excludes the possibility that, side by side with the proof of telepathy may be put forward theories or suggestions as to the mode of action. These suggestions may be rankly heretical in scientific eyes, or again they may attempt to explain the supposed facts in terms of matter and motion. In either case, even if it be a scientific crime to attempt the explanation of a new fact, the preliminary investigation seems harmless enough. The heresy, if any? lies in the suggested explanation and not in the proof of the fact, which is all that psychical research, as officially defined, attempts to accomplish. In a work which deals with the question solely from the experimental side, it is unnecessary to discuss the thousand and one sources of error to which we are exposed in collecting and dealing with spontaneous cases. There are, it is true, certain fairly obvious precautions necessary to ensure that no elements drawn from the ordinary sense perceptions formed the link between the mental states of the agent and the percipient, but these need not detain us long.

Only one serious source of error is likely to be present in reasonably cautious experiments— hyperaesthesia. We know little as to the ordinary limits of our sensory powers, and still less of their limits in the hypnotic and other abnormal states; indications imperceptible even to the trained observer, must always be reckoned with when agent and subject are in the same room, as an experience of M. Bergson will prove. He showed (Rev. Phil., 1886, p. 527), that a hypnotised boy was able to recognize and read arabic figures reflected in his eye, when their total heights could not have been more than -^hr °^ an hich. More than one case has been recorded in which, by practice, a person has been able to recognize, apparently by touch, and name a card drawn at random from a pack. In this connexion it is important to notice that the subject is frequently, if not invariably, unable to say whence he derives his knowledge, and that the group of experimenters may, therefore, be bona fide quite in the dark as to the disturbing elements in thought transference experiments and hit upon it, if at all, by chance.

The possibility of hyperaesthesia and subconscious interpretations of subconsciously perceived indications vitiate^ of r®y vitiate, most, if not all, experiments where the subject and agent are within sight of each other, whether directly or indirectly,

by the means of reflecting surfaces. In certain cases the indications may be auditory in their nature, though up to the present the so-called " unconscious whispering " 1 has never been proved to exist or to be a probable explanation of the results. In the place of a general discussion of the question, it will be more convenient to indicate in connexion with each experiment, or group of experiments dealt with at length, the possible sources of error under this head.

Leaving out of account fraud, which should be detected by any reasonably competent investigator, we have only one other source of error that need be here mentioned. This is what may be termed mental convergence. Ask a hundred persons to draw three diagrams, and the probability is that a majority will draw a circle, a square and a triangle. This source of error, and a cognate one, arising from the natural sequence of ideas in our minds, leading us to select numbers or draw diagrams in a certain order, which may be briefly termed a number-habit, or a diagram-habit, as the case may be, may, of course, according to circumstances, operate in such a way as to decrease the number of coincidences in the mental phenomena of the subject and agent, if their "habits" are different, or it may tend to act in the opposite direction.

1 Cf. Lehmann and Hansen: Ueber unwillkiirliches Flustern.

These errors can, however, be easily provided | against by ensuring that chance and not deliberate volition selects for us the diagram, card, number, or what not that is to be transferred. There may be, it is true, residual errors, if abnormalities in the cards or numbers lead to our unconsciously selecting precisely those which are favoured by the number or diagram-habit of the percipient. But this j chance of error is fairly remote, and even the appara-tus of a psycho-physical laboratory might not pass through the ordeal of an equally searching examination into possible defects, and whereas errors arising from convergence and divergence would be equally probable in a thought transference series where we have not to determine absolute values, the errors in the other case might be all in one direction.

A source of error sufficiently common in the early days of investigation into these matters — < ! a possibility fully recognized by the S.P.R. from the first — was muscle-reading. It may be laid down without danger of serious error that any success in divining the agent's thoughts, where ! subject and agent are in contact, much more when they are hand in hand, is largely due to muscle-reading, and that the slight unconscious motion thus sensed and interpreted are alone sufficient to account for the bulk of the successes. There may

be another element — the telepathic — but until telepathy is proved to be a fact, this cannot be assumed, and in any case the telepathic element must always remain a factor of uncertain value. Some of the successes may appear too striking to be due to muscle-reading alone, but we must consider that a considerable number of people have the power of automatic writing and drawing, that although they are as unconscious of what they are doing as if their hands belonged to a third person, they are no more unconscious than a third person, and may become dimly or clearly aware of the purport of the writing by directing their atrention to the movements of their hands. If now an individual may, by writing, externalize the ideas in his brain, ideas perhaps only present subconsciously, and become aware of them before he reads the writing, it may be possible for another person, who has himself no share in the production of the writing, to do the same. But clearly the writing is, in both cases, an entirely subsidiary element in the case. The pencil might be pointless or non-existent and the externalization of the thoughts and interpretation of the signs be no less complete than before, though the collateral evidence in the shape of the writing would no longer be present to back up the interpretation of the muscular movements. Possibly an element of this description may have

facilitated the more striking successes of the willing game.

However this may be, it is certain that no experiment where contact has been permitted is worth mentioning as evidence of telepathy. I therefore, include none such in the evidence which I consider in the present work.

CHAPTER III

The subliminal — Ordinary sense perception — Hypnotic hallucinations — Trance — Clairvoyance

The details of the experiments and their import will probably be more easily apprehended, if the discussion of them is preceded by some account of the meaning of the technical terms of psychical research, the use of which cannot be avoided in the following pages.

r Although it does not figure largely in the present work, we may begin with the subliminal — a term familiar to all readers of the posthumous work of F. W. H. Myers, Human Personality. His views on the subject will, I hope, be expounded in another volume of this series by a writer whose works on psychical research have already done much to popularize its ideas. Here it is not necessary to say more than will serve as a groundwork for what follows.

We become aware of the external world by means of sense perceptions. These are due to the stimulation of the retina by light waves, of the ear by air

waves, of the various nerve endings in the ordinary

33 D

skin by heat, cold, or pressure, and so on. As we shall be mainly occupied with visual impressions in the following pages, to the exclusion of sensations of hearing, touch, taste and smell, we may narrow the field to be surveyed by confining ourselves to this kind of perception. When rays of light fall upon the retina, it by no means follows that we become aware that they are so falling, and this may be due to two causes. The rays of light may be in themselves too feeble to be appreciated, however much we may bend our mind to the task; or, on the other hand, our attention may be otherwise occupied, and the stimulation of the optic nerve, though sufficient to cause a change in our consciousness, does not in fact do so, because we are engaged in watching something else, or because impressions of another.order, such as those of hearing or taste, crowd out the impressions of sight, at any rate to a considerable extent. To use a common phrase, we are, in respect of the impressions which fall unheeded, "absent-minded." There is a third reason why we may fail to take up into our everyday, waking consciousness, which we call our mind, the impressions which are transmitted by the nerves to the brain, they may be of too short duration to be understood; every one knows how difficult it is to read the name of a station when our train rushes through at full speed. In the case

of air waves, we may be unable to distinguish the particular ones on which we concentrate our attention, because they are drowned by the multitude of other air waves falling on the drum of the ear. All these causes may be operative in our waking moments and in full possession of our ordinary waking consciousness.

We may also fail to perceive the nerve impulses, or perceive them only in a distorted and unre-cognizable form because we are not awake. Messages from the external world do indeed reach us, and we are often living in a world which, while it lasts, often appears to us fully as real as the external world of our waking moments, but the world of our sleeping moments is the work of our minds, and the messages from the outside world are only incidental and do not necessarily play any part in calling into being our dream scenery and incident.

Again, we may be neither asleep nor, in the strict sense of the term, awake, but in a so-called hypnotic sleep. In this condition, we may be as fully conscious of the world around us as we are in everyday life, and no intrusive elements may appear of which bystanders in the normal state are unaware. On the other hand, it may equally happen that, in obedience to a hypnotic suggestion, a portion of the external world may disappear,

or seem to disappear, for us, and that other objects which do not belong to the external world of other living beings may, in the same way, come into existence for us. These conditions may even, as a result of suggestion, persist after the trance has ceased, reappear de novo at a time fixed by the hypnotizer, or first begin to appear long after the trance condition has ceased. To take a few concrete instances, a hypnotizer may, given a sufficiently sug-gestible subject, impose upon him the idea that a bystander is not really present, and the hypnotic subject will not only not see them, to all appearances, but not even hear them speak. 1 Just as portions of the external world may be, under these circumstances, abolished, the hypnotic subject may likewise take for portions of the external world figures or other objects of sense whose presence is suggested to him.

The important point to notice in the present connexion is that these hallucinations, negative and positive, are not necessarily dependent on the state of consciousness in which the subject is at the moment of the suggestion being realized. I may, for example, suggest to a patient that he will see me six months hence come into his dining room,

1 There is some reason to suppose that the unconsciousness of their presence is not absolute. The subject will be discussed in the volume on hypnotism.

say good morning, and disappear up the chimney, and, if he is susceptible, the scene in question will really be enacted, so far as his consciousness at the moment is concerned, though it may happen that he will forget all about it in a short time, just as we frequently forget our dreams, which at the moment of waking seemed vivid enough.

Forgetfulness is a common phenomenon, too common in fact, and it has, in general, no importance for the subject under discussion. The rapid and complete forgetfulness, however, of the incidents of the hypnotic trance, of the post-hypnotic phenomena, and of the dream world into which we pass or may pass every night, to emerge from it the next morning in the space of a few seconds 1 or less, stands on a different plane. We have here to do with what we may term a split-off portion of consciousness, another example of which is seen in the cases, seldom recorded till towards the last quarter of the nineteenth century, of so-called secondary personality, a milder form of which is seen in the cases not uncommonly reported in the papers, where the memory of the past life has vanished, largely if not completely, but is not replaced by the appearance of another personality to replace the lost one, nor by the assumption of another

1 Some French experiments on this subject go to show-that their duration may be measured by tenths instead of whole seconds.

name; the subject is simply lost and remains so until, by hypnotism or other means, the gap between past life and present consciousness is bridged over.

Now the interesting point about these split-off portions of our consciousness is that their existence does not seem to be confined to the dream state or the hypnotic trance. Indeed, the mere fact that post-hypnotic phenomena of the kind mentioned above, can be produced when the ordinary consciousness is entirely ignorant both of the suggestion and of its fulfilment, is proof positive that this is so in the case of such subjects as are susceptible to this kind of suggestion.

Another illustration of this same point is found in the fact that the sense impressions to which allusion was made at the opening of the chapter, which are too faint, or for other reasons do not rise above the threshold of the ordinary consciousness, may by suitable means be recalled by certain persons, not indeed by the ordinary process of remembering them, but by doing what is irreverently termed " putting the subliminal on tap." To take a few examples, if by means of a suitable arrangement a subject is allowed to catch a glimpse of a word or series of words, letters or numbers, which are, however, exposed for too short a time to permit their meaning to be realized or their order to be recalled, it is nevertheless possible to reproduce

them exactly as if the subject had been allowed full leisure to read and memorize them. Given a subject who can write automatically by means of planchette (or simply by holding a pencil between the fingers and allowing the hand to move apparently at random) and the words in question may be written down as if they had been seen or heard with perfect distinctness. A friend of mine was once on a tour in America with a large party which included some automatic writers. One day they resolved to try some experiments. One of these was to place an automatic writer at one end of a car in a room by herself, then came the rest of the party, in the central portion of the car, with instructions to shout at the top of their voices, which they carried out in a way that would effectu-ally drown any human voice even without the assist^ ance of the noise of the moving train; then, at the other end of the car to the automatic writer, came the experimenter; he had provided himself with a book which he read aloud, and the passage selected contained a sufficient number of uncommon words to make it very unlikely that they would be reproduced by a mere coincidence by the automatic writing. At the close of the experiment the passage in question was compared with the automatic script, and sufficient correspondence was discovered: to establish beyond question the fact that the

writing was not independent of the selected passage, of which, it is needless to say, the writer had been carefully kept in ignorance.

In the same way, facts which have come under our eyes without reaching our minds may be reproduced. Thus there is the oft-quoted case of the lady who held in front of her face, to shield it from the fire, a copy of the Times. A few hours later she looked into a crystal and was surprised to read there the announcement of a death which was subsequently found to be contained in the obituary column.

The whole of this fascinating subject of the subliminal has been studied in great detail in the Proc. S.P.R., by F. W. H. Myers, and in a more condensed form in his work on Human Personality. For further details we must refer inquirers to these works pending the appearance of other volumes in the present series.

The importance of the subliminal for our present purpose is twofold. In the first place, it is from the subliminal, the portion of our consciousness " below the threshold," or perhaps better " beyond the threshold/' that thoughts and pictures arise, as we shall see more in detail in the next chapter.

It is on the analysis of the content of these impressions, mental and sensory, and of the corresponding motor automatisms, and on the comparison of

the results with the ideas present in the mind of another person or persons, that the case for telepathy rests. The person who is endeavouring to transfer thoughts or impressions is termed the agent, the receiver is called the percipient.

In the second place, there is reason to suppose that the prima facie telepathic impressions, the impressions communicated by other means than ordinary sensory methods, depend for their communication in some way on the subliminal consciousness. How this happens we cannot of course say, and the hyper-sensitiveness of the subliminal, of which a few illustrations have been given above, must, of course, put us on our guard against possible errors of observation. For it must, be noted that we are, as a rule, unaware of how such sub-conscious impressions reach us (see Proc. S.P.R. iv. 532; Jouvn. S.P.R. i. 84; and Mrs. Verrall's remarks on the same subject in Proc. S.P.R. vii. 193). As an example of the importance of this subliminal communication, if we may so term it without prejudging the case, may be mentioned the cases given on pp. 28 and 81.

The interest of the subliminal for us is, however, not entirely exhausted by these two points. Not only shall we have occasion to deal with evidence drawn from dreams, which constitute, as we have seen, a common form of split-off consciousness,

but we shall have occasion to refer in some detail to trance phenomena. A person who falls into trance spontaneously is, in many respects, in a similar position to a hypnotized subject. There is unconsciousness of the events of the trance on awakening, and there is the existence of an apparently normally constituted personality or personalities, who usually claim to be the spirits of deceased relatives, or other dead persons, who take advantage of the absence of the medium's spirit to take possession of her body and communicate with this terrestrial sphere again. As to the evidence in support of this claim, nothing need be said in the present volume. All that is necessary here is to make clear what happens in the trance.

These trance personalities manifest themselves in much the same way as the ordinary subliminal, and there can be no possible doubt that they are, in most cases, the result of a sort of dramatic instinct on the part of the human subliminal, which leads it to dress itself up in a way that it hopes will be interesting to its auditors. They communicate sometimes by word of mouth, sometimes by automatic writing, sometimes by both simultaneously, sometimes even by speech, by ordinary right hand writing and by mirror writing produced by the left hand, all at the same time, the subjects of the three communications being absolutely distinct.

The subject of clairvoyance is not directly connected with that of telepathy, but inasmuch as it would throw some doubt, if proved to exist, on the evidence for telepathy or rather on the interpretation of it, we cannot pass over it here. Clairvoyance is a term used in a variety of meanings, but we are here concerned only with clairvoyance proper, or lucidity, that is to say with the perception of objects directly without the intervention of the ordinary nervous processes. The evidence for any such faculty is very slight and the possibilities of mal-experimentation so large that it would hardly be worth discussing were it not that one of the chief experimenters has been Professor Richet, whose records are usually so ample as to permit us to form an opinion as to the precautions taken to obviate false results.

The first series of experiments was made by M. Richet in the winter of 1887- 1888 with a number of diagrams, the nature of which was unknown to any person present, shut up in opaque envelopes, which were only opened after the guess had been made. It is true that in a certain number of cases Professor Richet had been himself the draughtsman, after drawing the diagrams he had put them away and was, so far as he knew, absolutely unaware of their nature. But it is clear that these trials must be eliminated; for it is impossible to say that

some part of his mind was not cognisant of their nature — the subliminal has a marvellous memory— consequently it cannot be affirmed that the experiments in which these were used do not, so far as they are successful, point to telepathy rather than clairvoyance. Of the forty-one diagrams which he publishes as being whole or partial successes, only two are of this nature; the remaining thirty-nine were drawn by a personal friend of M. Richet's, sent to him, and utilised unopened.

Of the experiments tried under these conditions, about 26 per cent, were, according to M. Richet's estimate, more or less successful. I have noted seven as being particularly close; some of these I reproduce (PL I.). In order to test the possibilities of chance coincidence, a series of guesses, amounting in all to over 5,000, were made and the proportion of successes calculated; they amounted to between 3 per cent, and 4 per cent. The difference is therefore sufficiently marked. It must not, however, be forgotten that, in the experiments proper, the whole series amounted to only 180, a number which may give results differing very widely from the average of a larger number of trials. On the other hand, even here, it is impossible to say that telepathy was altogether excluded. M. Richet does not indeed consider this possibility, which is at best very remote. It cannot, however, be overlooked that

^

[Plate I.

=3,

a

PROF. RICHET'S EXPERIMENTS. I. DIAGRAMS. 2. REPRODUCTIONS.

[Reduced to one-half.]

To face p. 44.

a human being was conscious of the contents of the envelopes. That this knowledge should be communicated to M. Richet, in the absence of the person in whose mind the knowledge was, is highly improbable, and the telepathic processes demanded by such an hypothesis are complicated in the extreme. We are, however, not entitled to exclude any hypothesis merely on the ground that it seems to us improbable. Consequently the experiments in question do not seem to be above criticism.

More satisfactory were the conditions in another series tried by Professor Richet in the summer and autumn of 1888. The subject on whom the experiments were tried was one whose name will be quoted in connexion with experiments to be dealt with subsequently — Leonie B. She was hypnotized by the experimenter and kept in the trance state on some occasions from 8 p.m. till 6 a.m., during the whole of which time Professor Richet sat by her. The objects used were cards, drawn from a mixture of ten packets of fifty-two cards each. No card was used a second time.

In order to prevent the subject from seeing the card before it was placed in the envelope, Professor Richet drew it at a distance of sixteen feet from her; in addition she had her back turned and the light was low. The card was drawn and placed as rapidly as possible in a so-called opaque envelope,

gummed down and given to the medium. During the experiment, which sometimes lasted for two or three hours, Professor Richet, as may be imagined, sometimes took his eyes off the subject, but never for long enough to permit of any manipulation of the envelope, much less of the precise procedure necessary to open and reclose it without leaving any trace of the operation.

Leonie's procedure was as follows. Taking the envelope in her hands she held it between them and drew on a sheet of paper diagrams of the various suits; then she counted on her fingers to ascertain the number of the pips, the process being repeated ad nauseam, till she finally made up her mind. There is no reason whatever to question the good faith of Leonie, as a general rule, but we cannot assume the good faith of hypnotized or any other subjects, when it is possible to conduct the experiments otherwise, without by so doing weakening their evidential character. It is therefore unfortunate that, in these laborious and wearisome experiments, Professor Richet not only allowed Leonie to open the envelope herself on some occasions, but even omitted to note on what occasions she did so. At the same time we can hardly suppose that she was prepared with a card, to which she-made her guess correspond. For in the first place it is very unlikely that she would have delayed her

answer so long. In the second place there is no reason to suppose that she possessed the conjuring ability necessary to palm off a secreted card and replace the card in the envelope by it, and this at a distance of about a foot from a person who was observing her closely. As a rule, the card was enclosed in one envelope which, although practically opaque so far as transmitted light was concerned, was not entirely so for reflected light. Leonie does not appear, however, to have scrutinized it in a way that suggested that she availed herself of this circumstance; she was, moreover, in a dim light until she made her guess and approached Professor Richet, at the end of the trial, to show him that the envelope was intact, and it was necessary for the light to be strong — full sunshine or a power-ful lamp — for anything to be detected in an ordinary way. Moreover, during the last twenty-two trials there was a second envelope, and we may assume that this was sufficient to prevent anything in the way of ordinary vision from giving information as to the card. Yet in four out of the twenty-two trials the card was correctly named.

In all, out of sixty-eight trials twelve cards were named by Leonie, the probability being that she would guess one or two, if no cause other than " chance " operated. The number of suits guessed was thirty-six against a probable seventeen.

When we look at the experiments in detail, the probability of some unrecognized cause being in operation is seen to be enormous. In the sixty-eight trials a full description of the card was offered only seventeen times; in two cases the description was incomplete; out of the remaining fifteen cards twelve were rightly named, and in the three other cases king of hearts was named for ten of hearts, knave of spades for knave of hearts and queen of diamonds for queen of hearts.

A further series of experiments was tried in 'which the errors above alluded to were avoided. The results were, however, much less striking. At the same time there was evidence of a power to select the court cards, seven out of nine named cards being correct.

On the whole it can hardly be said that the experiments go very far to prove anything of the nature of clairvoyance. Indeed it may be said that in the present state of our knowledge of X-rays, and other waves, we can not be certain that they are imperceptible to the hyperaesthetic. The experiences with N-rays in fact seem to point to considerable variation in this respect in human vision, unless indeed we prefer to take the view that the supposed rays are a product of the imagination and have no objective existence. Rays of some sort may have given information as to the card in the envelope.

It is equally impossible to be certain that hyperaesthesia of touch would not enable the medium to detect the very slight differences of elevation which must be present, especially in court cards. On the whole, therefore, the value of the experiments of Professor Richet, so far as regards clairvoyance, must be regarded as small.

The same remark applies to experiments in guessing the numbers and suits of cards, and details of some experiments in this by Mrs. Verrall will be found in Proc. S.P.R., vii. 174, sq. Mrs. Verrall, who is a most careful experimenter, did not, it should be noted, regard them as having any bearing on the question of clairvoyance, for the simple reason that the subject was, in all cases, able to see the card, if indeed she did not actually draw it. The same is true of a striking series of experiments by Mr. Y., given at the end of Mrs. Verrall 's paper. Bearing in mind the already mentioned long memory of the subliminal, together with a possible hyperaesthesia, which is certainly present in some cases, we see that there is no ground for assuming that any but the ordinary operation of the senses, ordinary that is, in respect of species, though extraordinary in respect of practical effi-ciency, is needed to explain the results.

At the same time, probable -though this explanation be, we are bound to recognize that, both in

E

these cases and in the experiments of M. Richet, the possibility of what we have termed clairvoyance has not been excluded, cannot in fact be excluded. It would be of the highest interest if some one who finds him or herself possessed of this power of guessing cards would try a series of experiments specially directed towards elucidating the question of the modus operandi.

When we come to deal with certain of the experiments in detail, it will be seen that there is an extraordinary difference between the results attained when the agent and percipient are in the same room and those reached when they are in different rooms. It is of course far more probable that some simpler cause is at work — the nature of which will be suggested when the experiments in question are reached. At the same time it is well to bear in mind that our knowledge of the human mind is very limited and that much of the evidence for telepathy at close quarters might in reality point in another direction.

CHAPTER IV

How we become aware p/ subliminal ideas — Mental impressions — Visions and hallucinations — Automatic writing *

We have seen in the last chapter that some impressions, too faint to enter our consciousness in the ordinary way, are relegated to the subliminal region of our minds and perhaps stick there, if the subliminal is not " put on tap " in some way. On the other hand, they may slowly emerge into our ordinary consciousness, and we become aware of them by a roundabout route. It happens probably to most people that in walking along the street they hear words the meaning of which they do not appre-ciate. Especially if they have been living abroad and are familiar with a foreign language does it happen that sentences are heard as meaningless collections of syllables which afterwards straighten themselves out and become intelligible, although the hearer may have been in doubt as to what language they were in and have looked for a clue in the wrong direction.

It has been indicated that there is some ground for supposing that subliminal ideas are specially

important in experiments which go to prove the existence of telepathy. In the present chapter we shall survey some of the methods by which the subject may either become directly aware of these subliminal ideas or may so externalize them as to bring them to the notice at once of bystanders and of themselves. These methods are three in number. The first two result in the subject alone becoming aware of the images or ideas. They are respectively mental impressions and sensory automatisms.

It is unnecessary to deal at length with mental impressions. Every one is aware that ideas come into the mind without our being at the moment conscious of their origin. Knowledge arrived at by means of the ordinary senses, as the experiments of M. Bergson prove (Rev. Phil. 1886, p. 127), may enter our consciousness without our being aware of how it got there. Or, to take another example, we endeavour in vain to recall a name or a word and finally give up the attempt. In a few minutes, it frequently happens, the desired name or word comes into our mind without any conscious effort.

It is clearly immaterial how the idea which rises to the surface reached the brain of the subject, whether by ordinary perceptive processes or by some other method. If there is such a way of learning facts or getting impressions as that which

is designated telepathy, these facts or impressions may manifest themselves in the consciousness of the percipient in just the same way as any other ideas originally confined to the subliminal region.

Our second class is known to psychologists as sensory automatisms. It includes such phenomena as crystal visions, hallucinations, pseudo-hallucinations and mental images, and, finally, dreams.

When we look at an object, especially a bright object, and then close our eyes, we commonly see what is termed an " after-image." With these and ordinary sense perceptions we have nothing to do.

MENTAL IMAGES

Many people are able at will to call up before their mind's eye the picture of an object or a scene, which they have once beheld, with all the vividness with which they are commonly seen in a dream. Others, among whom I am included, are unable to visualize, as it is technically termed, or are only able to do so imperfectly, possibly only at intervals. So far as I am aware, I have only once been able to visualize at will during my ordinary waking moments, and then the object which I called up before me was no more inspiring than an ordinary cane-bottomed chair. Just as, as far as we can see, the life of the dog must be very largely made up of sensations of smell, and his recollections present themselves

to him in the form of smells and possibly tastes, so the recollections of the visualizer seem to present themselves in the form of mental pictures. But mental pictures also flow across the visual field without their being consciously called up, and a subliminal idea which is the result of a telepathic message may manifest itself in the form of a mental image. An interesting experiment with this form of perception will be found on p. 148.

These mental pictures are clearly recognized as things of the mind. In technical language they are not externalized. In addition to these non-externalized cases, we have several distinct classes of visual perceptions, which appear to be located among the actual surroundings of the percipient and consequently must count as externalized. It must be understood that there is no hard and fast line of demarcation however. Between the mental images and the externalized vision or hallucination come a class of phenomena which are termed illusions hypnagogiques. Before one is wholly asleep or wholly awake, a half dream state seems to super-vene in some persons, which is characterized by the appearance of pictures, frequently faces, before their eyes, which may be closed or not. In some people they are very rare; I have, for example, only once seen anything of the sort — a weird procession of eyes, lions' eyes, crocodiles' eyes, snakes' eyes,

an interminable series, due to no cause, mental or physical, that I could trace. In others again they seem to be a normal sign of approaching sleep. They are more than mere memory images, but yet not fully externalized.

VISIONS

Coming now to the next class, that of externalized pictures, we have first of all visions, that is to say, pictures which appear to occupy a place among the surroundings of the percipient, but not to be of them. As an example of.this class we may quote a case published some ten years ago in the Report of the International Census on Hallucinations. A lady, Mrs. B., was in Italy and engaged in no more exciting occupation than giving her children their dinner. She was just standing over a tureen of milk and maccaroni, when she happened to look at the wall in front of her and saw it apparently open. The scene that presented itself to her was a bedroom in a house that was very familiar to her; on the bed lay the corpse of her mother with flowers on her breast. It subsequently turned out that the mother had died six days before and been buried at the time Mrs. B. saw the vision. She had not been informed of her mother's death, owing to the fact that she had quarrelled with her family and left England without giving an address.

Another class of visions is the kind which is seen

in crystals, bright surfaces, water, ink, or, which brings it very near the illusions hyftnagogiques, in black boxes or other dark spaces. These visions are sometimes so extraordinarily life-like, that I have seen people who experienced them for the first time thoroughly puzzled and suspicious of some trick by which living pictures were in some way produced in the crystal.

HALLUCINATIONS

Besides visions, our externalized pictures may also take the form of hallucinations. As a technical term hallucination simply means an object of sense perception or percept which is not due to any external cause, though it seems to be so due and can only be recognized as lacking the external cause with which we associate it when we come to analyse it. The term hallucination has unpleasant associations for some people and suggests ideas of delirium tre-mens, lunacy, and all manner of objectionable things. It must be remembered that, as a technical term of psychical research, it has no necessary connexion with anything morbid. No one will, for example, be alarmed because he happens to dream; but a dream is, technically, an hallucination and a particularly good example of one, as we shall see in a few moments. In our dreams we form part of an hallucinatory picture, talk to the hallucinatory

personages whom we have conjured up, move about in the hallucinatory scenery, and so on. In fact, it is only rarely that we recognize before awaking that it is a dream.

The hallucinations of our waking moments are much rarer than those of sleep, and consequently far more likely to make an impression. At the same time, the fact that we are awake makes it far easier to remember and note down the exact details. This form of hallucination is therefore particularly valuable evidentially. In waking hallucinations it usually happens that only a single figure or portion of the scene is hallucinatory, and herein lies its chief difference from the dream. The dream figures, for such they may be called, which we see during our waking moments, move about in our ordinary surroundings and appear to form part of them. In fact, it may be that only on reflection do we discover that they are dream figures. The best example of this class of hallucinations is the common ghost, and by that I mean, not the ghost of Christmas stories, which clanks chains and looks with mournful and despairing eyes at you; real ghosts are far too unconscious of their surroundings 1 to do anything

1 I do not mean to imply that in the case of the real ghost there is anything of the nature of the material or immaterial being occupying the space where the figure is seen. The series will include a volume on ghosts, in which the matter will be fully discussed.

rational as a rule; the ghost of which you hear when you get a story at first hand is an object that is frequently in many respects like a living person, but is discovered to differ from the ordinary human being by a trick that it has of disappearing in an unaccountable way, or perhaps of fading away before your eyes.

ILLUSIONS

For the sake of completeness, we may mention illusions. Illusions differ from hallucinations in that they are interpretations of real objects and not wholly the work of the mind. How far any hallucinations, except dreams, come under this category it is hard to say. Probably many that eventually act in every way independently of the spot at which they were first seen, may have had a so-called point de rep ere in the first instance, round which they formed, just as the crystal vision is often initiated by the specks in the crystal globe.

Examples of most kinds of hallucinations which cannot be discussed in detail here, will be found in the experiments cited in the discussion of the evidence for telepathy.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

Besides these sensory automatisms just discussed, we shall have to deal with examples

of motor automatism. By this is meant an impulse, not proceeding from a conscious volition, which results in the production of writing by means of planchette or otherwise, of table tipping, of the production of movements in the divining rod and of similar phenomena. Just as in sensory automatisms an impulse comes up from some unconscious stratum of our personality that results in an impression being made on our minds which exactly resembles normal sense perception, so in motor automatism an impulse sets in motion the muscles which are usually under the control of the will and produces results which simulate closely or in many cases exactly the results which we are accustomed to regard as due to the exercise of intelligence.

As an example of the intelligence, not to say malice, of planchette, we may quote a true story in which figured a young lady who cherished an affection for a certain young man, whom she was in the habit of meeting on Sunday mornings without the knowledge of her parents. One day the said young lady was asking questions of planchette, which was moving under the hands of another person, her parents being also present. Among other inquiries she wished to know whether it would be fine after church the following day. Instead of giving a straightforward reply, planchette responded

to the unspoken thought in her mind, and replied by the single word " George," to the confusion of the questioner and the planchette writer, who was in the secret, but far from wishing to betray it.

Automatic writing may also be produced in other ways. It is sufficient, in the case of many people, for them to take a pencil between forefinger and thumb and put a sheet of paper beneath. If they then take a book or otherwise divert their attention from the motions of their hand, it will probably be found to trace scrawls on the paper. These scrawls develop in a certain number of cases into an intelligible script, which differs indeed very widely from the ordinary handwriting of the individual, but is perfectly coherent at times, though not always easy to read.

Although none of the experiments dealt with below are concerned with table tipping, it may be mentioned here, for the sake of completeness in our brief survey in the various modes of automatic expression with which psychical research has to deal. Similarly, we may mention without discussing the performances of water diviners. Whatever the explanation of water divining, it is certain that it is a perfectly genuine gift, which is not confined to those who make a living by it, but shared by many respectable and even distinguished members of society.

Another example, possibly, of motor automatism is to be found in the so-called willing game, though here it is always possible that the movement is more voluntary and dependent rather on the evo-cation of a picture of the position in which a hidden object has to be sought or other sensory idea, rather than upon motor automatism proper. With techni-calities of this sort, however, we are little concerned, the less so as no examples of the willing game are quoted in the present volume, for reasons that will be explained below.

We have now surveyed the field with which we have to deal, that is to say, we have briefly glanced at the various methods by which an idea, prima facie telepathic, is found to emerge into consciousness. We may now proceed to the discussion of the experiments in detail.

CHAPTER V

Historical— The Magnetizers — Spiritualism — The Newnham experiments — Experiments by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, Professor Sidgwick and others

As the present work does not treat of thought transference in general, I will not attempt to give in detail the history of the idea, but only to discuss some of the already published experimental evidence and supplement it by experiments conducted by myself. It may, however, be interesting to recall briefly some facts which, if their signi-ficance had been seen, would have led to an earlier development of interest in the subject, the appearance of which, as a branch of investigation, does not in fact date further back than 1876, when it was brought to the notice of the British Association by Professor W. F. Barrett, F. R.S., President of the Society for Psychical Research at the time when these words were written.

Hypnotism has now been studied for a good deal more than a hundred years. As far back as

the twenties of the nineteenth century Puysegur and other French magnetizers detected in their subjects what was known to a later generation of English observers as " community of sensation," and the facts were investigated by a commission, appointed by the French Academy, which sat for no less than five years before presenting a report in 1831, and affirmed the reality of " Taction a distance." With a truly admirable regard for the " facts " of science, they resolved not to publish the report, because, if the majority of the statements were correct, one half of physiology would go by the board, and the dissemination of such knowledge would have been dangerous.

How far this attitude led to the question being ignored it is difficult to say. Perhaps, had the French Academy taken a broader view of " science " and faced the possibility of a reconstruction of hypotheses to make them suit the facts instead of cutting their facts to fit their hypotheses, telepathy might have been a subject of general interest fifty years earlier, and the investigation might have done much to induce men of science to take up " occult " questions generally, and to check the growth of spiritualism by suggesting that the spiritistic interpretation of certain facts was incorrect. The English observations failed to excite attention from a rather different cause. On the one hand, the

medical side of hypnotism was mainly to the fore, on the other hand, the interest in its psychical side was choked, to a large extent, by the ranker vegetation of spiritualism, which traces its origin to the Rochester rappings of 1848. Morin, Du Magnetisme (Paris, i860), affirms the existence of thought transference, but means no more than the interpretation of a somnambulist of the thoughts of a person by means of a study of his features, unconscious though it may be.

To one acute observer, however, if to no more, the idea of telepathy presented itself as an explanation of spiritualistic marvels. Writing in the Spectator of January 30, 1869, Mr., now Sir James, Knowles, editor of the Nineteenth Century, suggested brain waves as the explanation of death wraiths, 1 of so-called clairvoyance, and of other facts now more familiar to us than they were in those days. The idea had occurred to him as much as eighteen years earlier in 1851, in connexion with hypnotic experiments, and we thus have a writer linking the English magnetists with the Society for Psychical Research and its immediate predecessors.

1 The idea was, of course, not entirely new. Cf. Wal-ton's Life of Donne, -pp. 24, 25. The suggested explanation of the apparition of Mrs. Donne seems to be that it had something to do with brain waves. The author regards the case as analogous to that of two lutes, both of which vibrate when one is struck.

The same theory of spiritualistic manifestations was put forward, apparently independently, by Mr. H. M. Andrew in the first number of the Mel-bourne Review, issued in January, 1875, as a result of various experiments tried in 1873 or 1874, with a view of showing that the knowledge of the spiritualistic medium emanated from the brain of the sitter.

Six months earlier, in August, 1875, Dr. Mcgraw had expressed the opinion, in the Detroit Review of Medicine, that features in the willing game seemed to hint at the possibility of one man's nervous system being used by the active will of another to accomplish certain simple movements.

The real protagonist of psychical research in the world of science was, as has already been mentioned, Professor Barrett. His paper of 1876 dealt mainly with the phenomena manifested by hypnotized subjects whom he selected from among the children of a village in Westmeath, but the first published experiments date back to the year 1871 and were carried out by the Rev. P. H. Newnham and his wife. The modus operandi was as follows: Mrs. Newnham sat at a low table in a low chair, leaning backwards; her husband sat about eight feet distant at a rather high table, with his back towards Mrs. Newnham, who, as a rule, kept her eyes shut; he wrote down questions,

of the wording and purport of which Mrs. Newnham was absolutely unaware, and which she, in many cases, answered successfully by means of planchette, even when the facts given in her answer were not and never had been known to her. The questions were not communicated to Mrs. Newnham when an evasive or other answer was returned which necessitated further questions, nor even the general subject to which they alluded. The answers were occasionally illegible and sometimes irrelevant, but in the latter case it was generally found that they had reference to a previous question which had not been fully dealt with. It was possible to explain most of the few wrong answers by reference to the circumstances of the moment, and in nearly every case the purport of the question seems to have been understood. A statistical analysis of the results being impossible, owing to the nature of many of the answers, it is unnecessary to deal at length with the full series of 309 questions, details of which will be found in a paper on Automatic Writing by the late F. W. H. Myers. 1 From the point of view of evidence it is important to notice that, assuming the good faith of the experimenters, which there is absolutely no reason to doubt, the results having been noted in a diary obviously not intended for publication and only 1 Proc. S.P,R. t iii. 6-23.

made known eleven years after the event, the conditions were remarkably good. It may, of course, be argued that the minds of husband and wife are apt to move in similar grooves, but it must be remembered that with the exception of eight months in 1871 Mrs. Newnham never manifested the power of answering her husband's unspoken thoughts. The same remark applies, though with less force, to the criticism that Mrs. Newnham may have become aware of the purport of the questions, by subconscious interpretation, by the sounds produced by the pencil in writing the questions. But, apart from the improbability of this, the correct answers of the facts of which Mrs. Newnham had no knowledge, absolutely negative this explanation in some cases and any hypothesis must of course cover the whole of the facts.

From 1881 onwards many series of experiments were made, details of which will be found in the publications of the S.P.R. 1 I will not do more than quote some of the more important experiments and give statistical abstracts of those in which the conditions seem satisfactory.

An important contribution to the subject was made by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie's experiments in

1 Proc. S.P.R. vols. i. to xii.; Journal S.P.R. vols. i. to x, etc. A convenient resume is given by Mr. Podmore in Apparitions and Thought Transference, pp. 18-143.

THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

transference of tastes and pains. In the case of tastes, fifteen experiments x were tried on September 5, 1883, the agents being Mr. Guthrie, Mr. Edmund Gurney and Mr. Myers. The percipients were two ladies, Miss Edwards, who on the occasion in question was less sensitive than usual owing to a sore throat, and Miss Relph. In order to prevent errors arising from a possible smell given off by the substances, they were kept outside the room in which the percipients were, and in a dark lobby, so that the agents selected them at random and one investigator was often unaware of what the others took. The results are sufficiently striking to be worth giving in detail. —

No. of

experiment. Agents.

Perci-Substance.

Answer.

1. E.G. &M a

pient.

E Carbonate of Soda

2. M.G.

R

Carraway Seeds.

"It feels like meal — like a seed loaf

3. E.G. &M.

E

Cloves

— carraway seeds. Cloves.

4. E.G. &M.

E

Citric Acid

—

SM.G.

R

Citric Acid

Salt.

6. E.G. &M.

E

Liquorice

Cloves.

7. M.G.

R

Cloves

Cinnamon.

8. E.G. &M.

E

Acid Jujube

Pear drop.

1 Proc. S.P.R. ii. 3, sq.

2 E.G. — Edmund Gurney; M. — Myers; M.G. — Malcolm Guthrie. The agent is the sender of the presumed telepathic message, the percipient the receiver of the same.

GUTHRIE

No. of

experi-

ment. Agents.

Perci-Substance, pient.

Answer.

9. M.G.

R

Acid Jujube

Something hard

which is giving

way — acid jujube.

10. E.G. &M.

E

Candied Ginger

Something sweet and hot.

11. M.G.

R

Candied Ginger.

Almond toffy. [M.G. did not realize at once that he had ginger.]

12. E.G. &M.

E

Home made Noyau

Salt.

13. M.G.

R

Home made Noyau

Port Wine.

14. E.G. &M.

E

Bitter Aloes

—

15. M.G.

R

Bitter Aloes

—

