In 1854 A. de Gasparin published a book, Des Tables Tourmvitcs, in which exact experiments on the movement of objects and especially of tables, without contact, are reported. "As soon as a vigorous rotation of the table was set up," says De Gasparin, "we raised our fingers while keeping our hands linked so as to form a chain an inch or so above the table, which still continued to make two or three turns. On the following day we were able to induce rotation from a state of rest. Sometimes the movement stopped after a half revolution, sometimes it continued for two, three, or even four turns.... On another day, on the hands being removed from the surface, all contact being broken, the small table moved seven times to order.,,

This book made a stir, and Professor Thury, of the University of Geneva, who had taken part in De Gasparin's experiments, published in 1855 a pamphlet on the relation of these to general physics. He cites the following decisive experiment: "Two persons by themselves, Mme. de Gasparin and Mme. Dorat, drew along a small table without touching it. The table turned and swayed under their hands, held about an inch above its surface. I saw the space between the hands and the table during the whole time and I am certain that during the four or five revolutions made there was no contact whatever.... No doubt was possible."

The experiments were confirmed by similar ones made by F. de

aOn this subject the excellent book, L'exteriorisation de la motricite (Paris. Chanuel, 1896), by A. de Rochas should be consulted.

Rougemont in Switzerland, and by Hare, professor of chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania (Experimental Investigations, New York, 1855).

In 1868, Daniel D. Home, perhaps the most powerful medium known, made some experiments before Mr. Varley, chief engineer of the Atlantic Cable Company, and afterwards before the members of the London Dialectical Society then under the presidency of Sir John Lubbock; and later, before Sir William Crookes. Mr. Varley says:

"In my house, where Mr. Home had never before been, seven feet behind him there was a small table. Mr. Home asked me to hold his hands, and placed his two legs over my left knee. After a few moments the table began to move, and was pushed towards me by an invisible power, no person being near it, and while I was firmly holding Mr. Home's hands and feet. A large couch capable of seating eight persons was pushed right across the room, and obliged us to move aside... He adds, "Deception was impossible/'

The members of the Dialectical Society held fifty seances at which thirty persons were present, and their conclusions were as follows (I give only those which have reference to telekinesis):

1. Sounds appear to come from pieces of furniture, from the floor, and from the walls, often accompanied by vibrations perceptible to the touch, produced without any muscular or mechanical cause.

2. Movements of heavy bodies took place without any kind of mechanical action, often without contact or connection with any person.

3. Thirteen persons depose to having heard well-executed pieces of music from instruments not manipulated by any ascertainable agency.

In one experiment which they declared decisive, eleven members of the society turned the backs of their chairs to the table and knelt on them, feet behind and away from the table, hands resting on the chair-backs. The gas was alight above the table. Under these circumstances the table moved four times, and then, when the chairs had been placed a foot distant from the table, it again moved thirteen times in different directions and in obedience to verbal demands.

Fourteen witnesses depose to having seen hands or faces not belonging to human beings, but which nevertheless seemed alive and mobile. These were sometimes touched or held so that the witnesses are certain they were not duped or illusionized. Five witnesses certify that they were touched by some invisible being on different parts of the body whilst the hands of all persons present were fully visible.

The members of the Committee (who were for the most part wholly sceptical before carrying out the experiments) declare that they are convinced that "there is a force capable of moving heavy bodies without material contact, which force is in some unknown manner dependent upon the presence of human beings" (Report Dial Soc, p. 12).

Crookes made very exact experiments with Home, which should be read in the original on account of their leading importance.

He arranged a board on a wooden knife-edge like that of a balance, the board being maintained in position by a spring provided with a scale and indicator. The movements of the indicator could be mechanically registered so as to form a graph. Under these circumstances Home placed his hands four inches above the board, an assistant holding his hands and placing one foot over his feet. A graph was obtained, and in a subsequent experiment, Home being a yard distant, movement with the accompanying graph was again obtained.1

Mme. X., observed by Crookes, also produced movements of the indicator. On her placing her hands on a piece of parchment, repeated crepitations were heard in it.

Boutleroff, an eminent professor of chemistry, at Petersburg, made some experiments with Home in 1871. The normal tension of his dynamometer being 50 kg. it rose to 75 kg., the hands of Home being placed on the instrument in such a manner that any effort on his part would have diminished the tension instead of increasing it.

Crookes relates other striking experiences. "My own chair twisted round, my feet not touching the floor. Under the eyes of all present a chair moved slowly from a distant corner of the room. In another case an armchair came nearly up to where

Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism, William Crookes (F. R. S., 1874). The genuineness of Home's experiences has been impugned, but in point of fact, no slightest proof of fraud has ever been advanced. (See P. Petrovo Solovovo, On the Alleged Exposure of D. D. Home in France, S. P. R., xv, 1912, 274.) Moreover, no trickery could account for the results obtained by Crookes, Varley, and Lord Dunraven.

we were sitting and at my request moved back about three feet. On five different occasions, a heavy dining-room table rose from a few inches to a foot and a half off the floor while I held the hands and feet of the medium."

There were also experiments with an accordion which Home held by the finger-ends of one hand in a cage made of wood and copper wire. The instrument swayed about and played different airs. Home then let go the instrument and placed his hand on that of a spectator. The accordion floated about in the cage anrl continued to play.

M. C, prefect of the Loire, speaking of Home, said: "Home appals me and I can find no explanation, but I have seen. He ordered a handbell to climb up my leg, and when I tried to seize it, it eluded my fingers. He ordered a table to answer by raps, which was done; and, more extraordinary still, the raps also came under the soles of my feet.... Another time he ordered the table to rise off the floor; it then rose towards the ceiling; he told Mme. B.'s little girl to pull the table down, but each time she let go the table again moved upwards.... Then he said, 'Hold fast/ and the efforts of three men could not bring it down" (De Viel-Castel, quot. by Erny, A. S. P., 1902, xii, 147).

"One of the most amazing things I have seen," says Crookes, "was the levitation of a glass water-bottle and tumbler. The room was well lit by two strong alcohol-soda flames, and Home's hands were far distant. The two objects remained suspended above the table, and by tapping against each other answered 'yes7 to questions. They remained suspended about six to eight inches above the table for about five minutes, moving in front of each person and answering questions. We verified that Home was entirely passive during the whole time and that no wires nor cords were employed. Home had not entered the room before the seance."

"On another occasion," Crookes says, "I was in a dark seance. I was holding both hands of the medium in one of mine, his feet resting on mine. I had a pencil in my other hand. A luminous hand descended from above, and, having hovered for a few seconds, took the pencil from my hand, wrote rapidly on a sheet of paper, dropped the pencil, rose above our heads, and was lost in the darkness.

"Another time, in the light, Mr. Home was present with some friends, and some sheets of paper and a pencil were placed in the middle of the table. The pencil rose on its point, and after advancing by hesitating: jerks to the paper, fell down. It then rose and again fell. A third time it tried with no better result. After three unsuccessful attempts, a small wooden lath, which was lying near on the table, slid towards the pencil, and rose a few inches from the table; the pencil rose again and, propping itself against the lath, the two together made an effort to mark the paper. It fell, and then a joint effort was again made. After a third trial the lath gave it up and moved back to its place', (Researches, Edn., 1874, p. 94).

Another day "the small lath before mentioned moved across the table to me, in the light, and delivered a message to me by tapping my hand; I repeating the alphabet, and the lath taping me at the right letters. The other end of the lath was resting on the table, some distance from Mr. Home's hands" (p. 95).

"To attribute these results to fraud," says Crookes, "is absurd. What I have reported took place in my own house, where nothing could be prepared in advance. A medium sitting in another part of the room with several persons observing him attentively, could not by any fraud cause an accordion held in my hand, keys downward, to play, or make it float about in the room playing all the time.... He could not bring an instrument to move the window-curtains, tie a knot in a handkerchief, put it in a distant corner of the room, cause the notes of a distant piano to sound, raise a water-bottle and tumbler off the table, cause a coral necklace to stand up on one end, move a fan and fan the company, or set in motion a clock shut in a glass case firmly cemented to the wall."

These experiments, made by a renowned experimentalist, are so striking and so exact that it is amazing that they should not have been universally accepted. But I will make my confession: Until I had seen Eusapia at Milan I was absolutely sure that Crookes must have fallen into some terrible error. And so was Ochorowicz; but he repented, and said, as I do, smiting my breast, "Pater, peccavi!"

Mr. R. Dale Owen narrates an experience (quoted by Russel Wallace, p. 191) in which the medium was probably Home: "In the dining-room of a French gentleman, the Count d'Ourches, living near Paris, I saw on October 1, 1858, in full daylight, towards the end of lunch, a table laden with fruit and wine at which seven persons had been seated rise off the floor, all the guests standing round it without touching it."

The experiments with Home were made under unexceptionable conditions and this gives them considerable value. Mr. E. W. Cox, a serjeant-at-law, holding a high social position and a man of strong good sense, wrote to Home in 1876 as follows:

"My dear Home, in the experiments to which you submitted yourself before me, there was nothing of the nature of precaution or mystery. You sat down near me, anywhere, at any time in my garden, in my house, day or night, always, with one memorable exception, in daytime and in full light. You never refused to submit to any desired control.... You sat alone with me and there came to pass things that the united efforts of four men could not have obtained. Sometimes the phenomena took place, sometimes they did not. The results were of such a nature that no human hand could have produced, in my drawing-room, my library, and my garden, where all mechanism was impossible."

Henry Slade, a very powerful American medium, has also given many proofs of movement of objects without contact.

Zollner, professor of physical astronomy at Leipzig, relates (Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen) that without any visible contact with Slade, a wooden screen, half an inch thick, was violently broken. Direct writing was obtained on several occasions. A metal ball hung by a silk cord inside a glass globe, placed on the table and well lit by the candles, began to swing and to strike at regular intervals against the interior of the globe (evidently without contact with Slade's hands).

P. Gibier also experimented with Slade (Le Spiritisme, Paris, 1882. Le Fakirisme Occidental).

Gibier first verified the force and frequency of the raps. On one occasion, so strong a knock was delivered on the middle of the table as to lead him to think it must be broken. During this time the feet and hands of the medium were well in sight. In a daylight seance a chair placed forty inches away made a half turn and moved against the table.

"Subsequently in full daylight, a chest placed twenty-five inches away from his chair began to move, leaving the wall so slowly that we could verify that there was no contact between it and any other object; it then came and violently struck the table at which we were sitting.

"At ten different trials the slate held by Slade under the table was broken into several pieces. These slates were framed in very hard wood. We endeavoured to break them in the same way by striking them against the table, but never succeeded in even cracking them.

"Several times we have seen a framed slate leave Slade's hand, pass right under the table to the other side, and, when taken hold of, give the sensation of resistance as if another hand were holding the slate. We kept the hands of the medium in sight, and could see his two knees outside the table." 1

Mr. D. MacNab relates some experiments he made with a medium, quoted by A. de Rochas. These were mostly in darkness, which makes control very difficult and necessitates special precautions: but by the light of a red lamp he saw a small table rise from the floor, touch the hands held sixteen inches above it, descend again slowly, and touch the floor without noise.

I now come to experiments with Eusapia Paladino. These are very numerous, and I shall describe a few of them in some detail of which I was an attentive observer, having attended over a hundred of her seances, at Milan, Rome, Carqueiranne, Ribaud Island, and Paris.

As to Eusapia herself: she was a very simple-minded woman, but her simplicity did not exclude a certain shrewdness. She was quite uneducated, could not read, and at the beginning of the scientific experimentation she could only speak the Neapolitan dialect and a little Italian. Being very intelligent she learned to understand French and to speak it a little. She was rather below the usual stature, plump, and had very small hands.

She had an unhappy life. Her father, a Neapolitan peasant, was murdered by brigands: her husband bullied her and made a profit out of her. Generous by nature, she gave much to the poor and spent recklessly all that she earned, and so died in poverty and neglect.

This excellent woman was a remarkable medium, extremely good-natured, lending herself to the most diverse experiments, and was studied by most contemporaneous men of science who cared for such matters; first by E. Chiaia, and then by Aksakoff, Schiaparelli, Lombroso, Gerosa, G. Finzi, Morselli, Brofferio,

*I saw Slade once with Gibier. Slade handed me a slate and put a small fragment of slate-pencil on it. I held one end and Slade the other, and we put the slate under the table. In a few moments we heard a noise as of writing. There was some writing and the bit of slate-pencil was worn. But I give this experiment (my only one of the kind) under all reserves; (i) it was long ago; (2) I cannot find the notes I took; (3) Slade's honesty is open to question, and (4) experiments with slates lend themselves to trickery.

Bozzano, Venzano, Carlo Foa, Bottazzi, A. de Gramont, A. de Rochas, J. Maxwell, Segard, Camille Flammarion, Ochorowicz, Schrenck-Notzing, P. Curie, Mme. Curie, d'Arsonval, Courtier, Siemiradzki, Dariex, Watteville, Sabatier, F. Myers, Sir Oliver Lodge, Mr. and Mrs. Sidgwick, Feilding, Carrington, Herlitzka, Porro, and several others. The bibliography of experiments made with her is large, and is given in Morselli's admirable work, to which I refer readers.

Her seances were at first conducted in full light, then by degrees (so that the phenomena should be more powerful) she asked that the light might be reduced, "mow luce." Latterly, the seances were almost in complete darkness, but as control was difficult under these conditions, we used to place a lamp at some distance so that the light should come through a half-opened door or shutters.

Eusapia claimed to be directed by a guide, John King, said to be the brother of Katie King, and the father of Eusapia herself in a previous existence (?). The objective reality of this mediumistic personality is very probably null; it dates from the first experiments with M. Damiani at Naples when he first began to direct her, and especially with Ercole Chiaia, her brave and persevering protector who first made her known to the scientific world by a letter to C. Lombroso, August 9, 1888.

The experiments with Eusapia have not been without their use. All the men of science, without exception, who experimented with her were in the end convinced that she produced genuine phenomena. It is true that at Cambridge she gave a series of semifraudulent seances, because the Cambridge experimenters, R. Hodgson more especially, adopted methods of procedure that made fraud possible and easy, i.e., almost encouraged fraud.1

At the moment in an experiment when a movement without contact was about to take place, Eusapia gave warning that a phenomenon was coming, so that these did not occur unexpectedly. The full attention of the observers was awakened and all possible precautions could be taken at the fateful moment that no trickery should be possible. Professors of legerdemain do the exact opposite, and endeavour to distract attention at the crucial moment of their tricks.

1Ochorowicz has called attention to this unconscious fraud in a remarkable memorandum in which he shows how greatly Hodgson's method was defective in intentionally leaving one of Eusapia's hands free.

Every movement of an object at a distance seems induced by Eusapia's energetic muscular movements; her arms, her legs, and her body twitch, and everything happens as though the muscular contractions were intended to act at a distance. She is not in trance at the start, but in the course of the seance trance gradually supervenes.

She is not easily hypnotizable. Ochorowicz used to magnetize her after the seances, to induce restorative sleep; for after each seance, often lasting two or three hours, she was much exhausted. The metapsychic phenomena produced by her were very various. There was little or no lucidity, but always objective phenomena, especially movements of objects without contact and materializations. In this chapter I shall speak only of the former.

In this case the essential point, indeed the only point, is to be certain that the movement of the object could not be brought about by the hands, the feet, the head, or the body of Eusapia. The hypothesis that the experimenters were hallucinated is as grossly absurd as to suppose that one of them was playing a practical joke. There was neither apparatus, nor preparation, nor instruments. Eusapia was dressed in a close-fitting black garment without pockets, nor was any object, any cord, or any wire within her reach. If she played any trick it could only be with her bare hands.

All those who experimented with her know this, and therefore their one and only care was to hold her hands effectively.

In this connection I replied to Hodgson: "To say that the hand is held signifies in the first place that one has no doubt of its being the right or the left. If, when my duty was to hold the right hand, I was not absolutely sure that I had the right hand during the production of the phenomenon, I at once stopped the whole by saying 'I have let go the hand/ and the other experimenters did the same. We arranged to hold the hands well, all the fingers in our palms, or the wrist and part of the fingers. At each phenomenon we reminded each other of this necessary exactitude, saying ad nauseam a hundred times in each seance, 'I hold the right hand' or 'I hold the left hand/ Our only business was not to let the hands escape. Well, without making extravagant claims to perspicacity or skill, it seems to me that after three months of practice one can be certain of holding fast a human hand."

In a very successful experiment in my house at Carqueiranne, Mrs. Sidgwick held Eusapia's left hand, and my lamented friend,

Fleet-surgeon Segard, held the right. At the moment that the piano, placed fourteen inches from Eusapia, sounded, I asked him, "Are you sure that you have hold of the hand, the same hand?" and on his affirmation, I said, "Take care, if you are mistaken, it is complicity/' In this experiment, Lodge (I think) held the feet. H. Sidgwick then declared the experiment unexceptionable, but that an object held in Eusapia's teeth might strike the keys. I then put my hand over her mouth, all other conditions remaining the same. The notes sounded again.

Instances of the movement of objects, the table and other things, were innumerable.

The first detailed account (Naples, 1891) was given by Lombroso: "Eusapia's feet and hands were held by Professor Tamburini and by Lombroso. A handbell placed on a small table more than a yard distant from Eusapia sounded in the air above the heads of the sitters and then descended on the table, thence going two yards to a bed. While the bell was ringing we struck a match and saw the bell up in the air.

"A large piece of furniture approached us slowly from about two yards' distance; like the creeping of a huge lizard."

At Milan in 1892 in an ingenious series of successful experiments devised by G. Finzi many instances of movements and levitation of a table were verified. In one case, confirmed by photography, the table was maintained in the air for several seconds. This photograph is reproduced in De Rochas's book (p. 48), and it shows that I was holding Eusapia's left hand and her two knees, while Lombroso held the right hand. In one case of complete levitation AksakofT notes that Eusapia's hands were not in contact with the table at all.

A heavier chair, weighing twenty pounds, a yard distant from the table and behind the medium, approached Schiaparelli.

In darkness the phenomena were much more marked: the knocks in the substance of the table and under it, which were heard in full light, became much stronger — a noise like a heavy blow with the fist on the table; knocks on the chairs, hard enough to cause the chair with the person sitting on it to be twisted round: transport of objects, some from several yards' distance and weighing several pounds; and flight of different things through the air — all these were observed.

Eusapia's feet were on my knees and I held both her hands when a tambourine was raised above our heads, and its surface struck as though by a hand. Another time, when Eusapia's hands were tied, a handbell was placed on a chair at her right. The light was extinguished with the request that the bell should sound immediately. At once the chair was upset, the bell sounded, and was moved on to the table. Light was restored, and the knots were found perfect. Another time I held both of Eusapia's feet, Schiaparelli and Finzi held her hands while the table was entirely levitated.

The experiments at Rome (1893 and 1894) by Siemiradzki and Ochorowicz were equally evidential. While Eusapia's hands were held, a hand-organ floated over the table, sounding all the while as if the handle were being turned. Once the piano behind the medium was displaced, and its cover was raised. As Siemiradzki had asked that high notes in the treble and low notes in the bass should be struck at the same time, this was done, proving, as he said, the action of two distinct hands. A glass half full of water on the sideboard out of reach of our hands was carried to the lips of Ochorowicz, of Eusapia, and of another person present, who all drank of it. This took place in darkness with marvellous precision. At the same time cracking noises were heard in the wood of the table varying from slight knocks to heavy blows such as might be given by a powerful fist.

At Warsaw, Ochorowicz, holding Eusapia's hands and feet, was careful that not even her clothes should touch the table. In light, dimmed, but still quite sufficient to enable the experimenters to distinguish forms, the table rose horizontally three times into the air, without previous oscillations. Then Eusapia, pushing forward one knee, said, "I will raise the table with my knee/' though the table was separated from the knee by an interval of eight inches. The knee was raised six inches and the table eight inches. The same effect was produced when both legs were raised at a distance from the table — the table rose at the same time as the medium's legs.

A dynamometer marked a force three times as great as Eusapia's and in excess of that of the strongest man present.

The following experiments were made in my house at Ribaud Island and at Carqueiranne.

Ribaud Island, where I have a little villa, is a small island in the Mediterranean inhabited only by the lighthouse-keeper and his wife. I brought Eusapia there, and asked Ochorowicz to come for experimentation. For three months we experimented three

times a week, and continually verified, fully, movements of objects without contact and other phenomena to which I shall recur.1

After having recounted the success of our experiments, I invited my friends, F. Myers, O. Lodge, Schrenck-Notzing, and Mr. and Mrs. Sidgwick, to come to Ribaud and judge de visu. I will give extracts from Oliver Lodge only:

"A chair placed near the window, several feet distant from the medium, slid along, rose up, and struck the floor. The medium was held and no person was near the chair. I heard some notes on an accordion placed not far from us. A musical box was floated through the air and carried above our heads. The key was turned in the lock of the door, laid on the table, and again replaced in the lock; a heavy table (forty-eight pounds) was raised eight inches oflf the floor, the medium standing up and placing her hands lightly on one corner of the table."

Other seances took place at Agnelas, in 1895, in the house of M. de Rochas, in presence of M. Sabatier, dean of the Faculty of Sciences (Montpellier); of J. Maxwell, Attorney-General at Bordeaux; of A. de Gramont, member of the Institute of France, and of M. A.-C. de Watteville, licentiate of sciences.

The results were the same, more clear, if that were possible, than those obtained at Milan, Rome, and Ribaud.

"The table was raised twelve inches from the floor, Eusapia's hands hardly touching it and sometimes not touching it at all; her knees and feet were held by Dariex, the legs of the table being quite free of all contact with the medium. A little pianola weighing nearly two pounds (nine hundred grams), played a few notes, then rose into the air while Eusapia's hands, feet, knees, and head were firmly held.

"We heard the key of a chest creak in the lock while Eusapia was held as above. A last experiment was very decisive — a letterbalance was displaced and was lowered and raised without contact. The light was strong; there was certainly neither a hair nor a wire there."

1 have not published, and shall not publish, these notes; they are wearisome in their monotony:/ "the hands are held — I am touched on the right — I am touched on the left." To have an exact record I dictated to my secretary, Bellier, who wrote in the adjoining room, all details as the experiments went on, and he noted the exact times. The investigation was long and minute, perhaps unnecessarily minute, but apart from systematic error that I cannot imagine, it established completely the fact of movements without contact.

In fine, the experimenters in their summing up say, Eusapia can act on material bodies at a distance without contact. The control has been as perfect as any control resulting from clear and direct sight of an experimental fact can be.

Experiments at Genoa, 1901. Professor Morselli, who was at first very sceptical, but like all who have experimented with Eusapia, was afterwards completely convinced, gives the details of the facts he observed in a book which is a model of erudition (Psicologia e spiritismo, 2 vols., Turin, 1908).

I quote here only what concerns telekinesis, extensive quotation being impossible (p. 361): "In the first two hours of the seance, movements and oscillations of the table: loud noises in the dark or in weak light... raps corresponding with muscular contractions or gestures, displacements of objects, sounds from musical instruments, passage through the air of a ruler from the cabinet which touched the arms and shoulders of the sitters — all repeated to satiety. A small table placed a yard away from Eusapia was drawn to her, while I held her right hand and her legs. Mme. Ferrero held her left hand. The table was twice raised six to twelve inches from the floor.1

"This experiment, " says Morselli, "was controlled with the utmost rigour; everything was visible by red light, and I am certain that the phenomenon is genuine/'

In another experiment (1901) Eusapia was held on the left by Porro, on the right by Morselli; the latter said aloud, "I am thirsty." Then a water-bottle and glass were moved on to the table and a glass full of water was put to the lips of each sitter in succession.2

Three eminent physiologists, doctors of the University of Turin, Carlo Foa, Herlitzka, and E. Aggazotti, who studied under the celebrated physiologist, Angelo Mosso, held a series of experimental seances in the Laboratory of Psychiatry at Turin

*A very good photograph (vol. ii, p. 363) was taken of this; both feet, both hands, and the knees can be seen clear of the table, which is completely levitated.

aThose who wish to see all that has been written on Eusapia may consult the Bibliografia Paladiana by Morselli (vol. i, pp. 134-170). It will be seen that all the experimenters from 1889 to 1907, with the exception of Mr. E. Feilding and Alice Johnson, were completely convinced. I do not know what Alice Johnson now thinks, but Feilding has recanted his negations founded on the defective Cambridge experiments. D'Arsonval said he could not form an opinion and remained doubtful. I think his uncertainty has now disappeared.

University, and were absolutely convinced of the genuineness of the objective phenomena produced by Eusapia. Objects beyond her reach were several times brought on to the table; graphic recorders placed out of reach of her hands and feet gave records; a heavy and solid table was broken without being touched by anyone; and a photographic plate wrapped in black paper gave the impress of fingers.

Messrs. Foa, Herlitzka, and Aggazotti say with reason (as I have often said, and as seems obvious): "If these phenomena appear strange, it is because of their relative infrequency; they are not more marvellous than the biological phenomena that we daily observe" (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 294).

Another experiment was made in 1907 by Professor Lombroso, Drs. Audenino and Norlenzki, the editor, Bocca, and other wellknown persons. The results were always the same. Registering apparatus placed too far away for the hands of Eusapia to reach them gave records; a mandolin played by itself. The form of a head was seen (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 212-218). It would seem that under these conditions doubt should be impossible.

Messrs. Berisso and Bozzano relate that in May, 1900, in a fully lighted seance at Genoa when everyone could see Eusapia sitting with her hands on the table under control, objects were transported, notably a trumpet which was seen suspended in the air. Sounds came from it and it was at a greater height than the hands of any person could have taken it. Similarly at the next seance, when a guitar rose three yards above the floor (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 473-528).

M. Venzano saw a fluidic hand take shape and emerge from the right shoulder of the medium to get a glass full of water and carry it to the medium's mouth. Professors Morselli and Porro were present at these experiments.

At the Psychological Institute, which devoted forty-three seances in 1905, 1906, and 1907 to the study of Eusapia, the report of Courtier (in spite of his hesitations, reticences, and contradictions) ends by admitting that movements seem to be produced by simple contact with the medium's hands, or even without contact; and that molecular vibrations (knocks) in external objects at a distance can be positively asserted. The whole of telekinesis is contained in these two basic admissions (Ball, de I'lnst. Gen. de Psychol, 1909).

In the debate on this matter, Courtier adds the interesting testimony that the objects moved do not follow straight lines, but seem to move in curves as though directed by an intelligent mechanical force.

The Cambridge experiments and the doubts they raised in the S. P. R. may be considered as ineffective. Myers, at a seance held in my house, formally admitted the phenomena as genuine: later in 1909 Everard Feilding, Mr. Carrington, and Mr. Baggally, an expert in legerdemain, made some decisive experiments at Naples. Mr. Feilding, while holding and seeing Eusapia's two hands, was touched behind the curtain by a living hand, three fingers below and the thumb above, and grasped so that he felt the finger-nails in his flesh. These hands occasionally became visible. Mr. Baggally, while seeing and holding the hands of the medium, was touched on the back of his own hand by a hand stroking it and proceeding up his arm (Report of the Commission of the S. P. R. charged with experiments with Eusapia Paladino).

I cannot do better than report textually the remarks upon this medium prompted by the good sense of Mr. Hereward Carrington.

"In November and December, 1908, Mr. Everard Feilding and Mr. W. Baggally and myself held ten seances in our rooms at the hotel under perfect conditions of control, and we were convinced that authentic metapsychic phenomena were produced that no trickery could account for. The conviction produced was quite contrary to my expectations.... If there were doubtful phenomena obtained in America the reason was that they did not know how to conduct their experiments with Eusapia, and that she was tired, exhausted, and disturbed.... It is my belief that among American mediums for physical effects, 80 per cent, practise trickery; but Eusapia produces genuine phenomena.... Every one that studies these problems with her, giving sufficient time and patience, will be convinced that among the phenomena that she presents there are some that no known laws can explain. These facts are beyond question."

Is it necessary to speak of bets on the reality of telekinesis such as that made by M. Le Bon, who passes for an intelligent man? These establish nothing, and science is not advanced whether M. Le Bon wins or loses his wager. Who is going to bet that he will make an aerolite fall in his garden?

I have insisted on the phenomena of telekinesis produced by Eusapia because there have perhaps never been so many different, sceptical, and scrupulous investigators into the work of any medium or more minute investigations. During twenty years, from 1888 to 1908, she submitted, at the hands of the most skilled European and American experimentalists, to tests of the most rigorous and decisive kind, and during all this time men of science, resolved not to be deceived, have verified that even very large and massive objects were displaced without contact.

To report the many experiments mentioned in the spiritist journals on objective phenomena would extend this chapter beyond measure; I merely refer readers to them, only remarking that the conditions of control in such cases are obviously less complete than in those reported above.

Movements of objects without contact have some connection with the phenomena observed in so-called haunted houses. Dr. Dariex has published interesting observations to this effect {A. S. P., 1892, ii, 189-208).

He heard during the night curious and inexplicable noises in his study (No. 6, Rue du Bellay, Paris), and found in the morning that chairs had been upset and displaced. Wishing to deal with this scientifically and judicially, he and four friends, of whom two were medical men, sealed up the door with six seals. Despite this the chairs were noisily displaced in the room though no one could enter either by the window or by the chimney, nor could any wire be introduced under the door.

Dariex was able to observe table-movements without contact, working with Mme. B., a non-professional medium. In the light of a gas-fire turned full on, a table weighing thirteen pounds slid sixteen inches along the floor, the hands of the medium being on her knees, and twenty-four inches distant from the table. Dr. Mercier adds that the table started of itself and that he could not detect the least movement by the medium.

Victorien Joncieres, a well-known musician, relates that he went one evening to visit a friend, a highly placed government official, whose young niece had remarkable mediumistic powers. They saw a chair rise above the table; the girl placed her two little fingers on the edge of a very heavy table, "which then rose well above our heads, so that we had to stand up to follow its upward course. It remained poised in the air for a few moments and then descended noiselessly to the floor" (Chevreul, p. 343).

Very marked movements of objects without contact were obtained with Stainton Moses, who was a remarkable medium. He took a good degree at Oxford, was ordained priest, and took a parish in the Isle of Man, and then became a master in University College School. His sermons were highly thought of, and his loyalty and honourable conduct won general respect. He had great mediumistic powers, and in his book, Experiences in Spiritualism, he gave the results of his experiences which were remarkable both from the objective and the subjective point of view. Dr. and Mrs. Stanhope Speer, who were his intimate friends, have published careful and valuable notes on all the phenomena.

"The movements of the table begin at once when it is barely touched: it is then best to take the hands away and leave it to itself. The tipping has been more marked when all present were at some distance. It went backwards and forwards on the floor and came back to its usual position when no one was touching it.... Sometimes the knocks on it were like hammer-strokes, heard in the room below and enough to make one think that the table would be smashed. Sometimes the whole room was shaken by the blows" {A. S. P., 1895, 211).

Stainton Moses cites the experiment that I give below (abridged) as being conclusive:

"At 6 p.m., in full daylight, as I was with a friend who had come to see me, my dining-room table which was an old and very heavy one, placed on a carpet, was shaken by strong blows. It moved and shivered as if it were coming to pieces, though we were not touching it. We then got up and placed our hands eight inches above the table, which rose to touch the hands."

Another experiment is given on page 219:

"The room that had been illuminated by luminous psychic rays suddenly became dark. The table, touched by no human hand, resounded to a series of knocks of varying force, some like blows of a sledge-hammer, indicating an intelligence that showed itself impatient or serious according to the nature of the communication. The room was in complete darkness except that from time to time a luminous vapour came and went round one of the legs of the table."

"Often," says Dr. Speer, "we heard knocks on the door, the sideboard, and the walls, at a distance from the table where we were sitting. They could not be produced by any human means; I satisfied myself of this by every possible method.

"We got direct writing, and the movement of heavy objects such as tables and chairs was not infrequent; the table being sometimes drawn from a considerable distance off. The table (of solid mahogany) was moved more easily than by our united efforts: we often attempted in vain to arrest its movements."

Dr. Elliott Cowes and Mrs. Cowes relate (A. S. P., 1893, ii, 372):

Round a heavy table under a chandelier with two, three, or four lighted gas-jets (the light being strong enough to read by) all present stood two feet away. There was no contact of person or clothing with the table, nothing nearer than twelve to eighteen inches. Then the table raised one of its legs and let it fall to the floor so heavily that the whole room shook and the gas-globes rang. "If this is not telekinesis," says Dr. Cowes, "we cannot trust our senses."

M. C. de Vesme has seen very clearly marked phenomena of telekinesis with Count Ugo Baschieri (A. S. P., November, 1915, xxv, 261-263).

"I have never," he says, "verified the displacement or levitation of a small table under such good conditions for observation. Everybody was a yard distant from the table, which moved towards the medium, but the movements of the table and those of the medium were not simultaneous." Another day, in a quite private seance, at his own house, M. de Vesme saw a carnation placed in a vase of flowers, bend, twist (and in one case), break under the influence of magnetic passes, and M. de Vesme verified that there was no thread." 1

M. Fremery, an artillery officer, and editor of the fortnightly review, Tackoustig Leben, had some evidential experiences at Mme. Huygens's house in presence of Dr. Floris Jansen, director of the laboratory of psycho-physics of Amsterdam, and Dr. van

*I saw some cryptesthetic phenomena with Maxwell, De Vesme, and Count Baschieri at my own house, during the war. No premonition worth remembering was given, but a curious thing happened which Count Baschieri considered metapsychic. He placed his handkerchief to his eyes and withdrew it stained with blood, perhaps five grams of blood, undiluted. His eyes had sweated blood. I could not discover any conjunctival ecchymosis. I do not make any comments, but only mention the fact, which, physiologically, is quite abnormal, and hardly resembles stigmatizations. I could not affirm the phenomenon to be authentic and not simulated, for, however unlikely, it is possible that the handkerchief was already blood-stained. The movement was too sudden and unlooked for to enable me to observe closely. — C. Richet.

Branen. There was enough light to see the hands of the medium, which were held by the experimenters. A sofa approached the table and moved away again; a guitar placed five feet above the floor sounded; a palm-leaf moved all ways and floated up to the ceiling, lit by a red lamp; it brushed against the ceiling (twelve feet high) in wide sweeps, then came down again and touched each of the sitters. All the while a musical box played, and gave answers by raps to questions put (A. S. P., 1908, xviii, 251).

At Gratz a non-professional medium, Mme. S., in private seances had very clear tipping and levitations of tables. A very heavy table in massive oak was often displaced, and once while the sitters joined hands, it rose into the air about a yard, swayed a little, and dropped back.1

Erny states that from 1865 to 1869 he observed conclusive proofs of telekinesis with the talented composer, F. P. "A table remained poised with one leg resting on a sofa and three legs in the air. All our experiments took place by daylight or in the evening in full light. There was no need to join hands; it was sufficient for P. to place a finger on the middle of the table for it to rise, very often at once, sometimes turning over on him" (A. Erny, loc. cit., 204).

The celebrated Russian chemist BoutlerofT experimenting through Kate Fox in his own rooms along with Aksakoff and Mme. BoutlerofT, observed movements without contact. BoutlerofT was very sceptical and Kate much open to suspicion, but a musical box seemed to wind itself up and started to play. Kate's legs were held by Mme. BoutlerofT and her hands were visible on a plate of luminous glass.

J. Ochorowicz has studied telekinesis with great care through the powerful mediumship of a young Polish girl, Stanislawa Tomczyk. I have myself been present at several experiments with her that seemed quite conclusive. The illustrations (Figs. 11-13) show some of the photographs taken. Small objects — a ball, a handbell, a needle — are drawn towards the medium and maintained in the air long enough for a photograph to be taken even in a moderate light.

It cannot be supposed that these objects are held up by a

lNordberg, Geisterglaube, Spiritismus, und vierte Dimension (Psychische Studien, October, 191 8, 415).

thread, for a ball cannot be balanced on a thread, which would, moreover, appear in the photograph. Stanislawa turns up her sleeves to the elbow, washes her hands in soap and warm water, after which her hands remain always in full view. A commission at Warsaw composed of physicians, physiologists, and engineers carefully verified these facts and despite the furious opposition of Professor Cybulski, who denied the facts while declining to examine them, certified to their entire authenticity.

Fig. 12. — Telekinesis by Stanislawa Tomczyk (After Schrenck-Notzing).

The rising of a ball. The fluidic thread, by enlarging (Fig. 13) becomes visible, starting from the nail and showing swellings in its path.

In telekinesis with small objects even in full light, fraud is always possible if the observers are not fully vigilant; for such small objects may be displaced by a thread. Ochorowicz has worked out this question in his experiments with Miss Tomczyk. There are cases in which the object is moved without any thread, and others in which a thread does appear; but this thread is not the hair or fine wire of a conjuring trick, it is a fluidic thread. "I have felt," says Ochorowicz, "this thread on my hand, on my face, on my hair. When the medium separates her hands the thread gets thinner and disappears; it gives the same sensation as a spider's web. If it is cut with scissors its continuity is immediately restored (p. 262). It seems to be formed of points; it can be photographed and is then seen to be much thinner than an ordinary thread. It starts from the fingers. Needless to remark that the hands of the medium were very carefully examined before every experiment,, (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 208).

Ochorowicz cites a curious observation made by the Chevalier Peretti with Eusapia at Genoa. A glass having been raised by Eusapia without contact, she cried out, "The thread, look at the thread." Peretti took the thread and pulled it; it broke and saddenly disappeared.

This "fluidic thread" should be compared with the fluidic emanations from Marthe Beraud. The minute details given by Ochorowicz should be carefully studied.

Instead of quoting the experiments by Ochorowicz, I will cite those by the Warsaw Committee (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 37):

A celluloid ball, 6 cm. in diameter, was placed in full light on a dynamometer. S. placed her hands two or three centimetres from it and the ball began to roll off the dynamometer on to the table. S. ordered it to return, which it did. There was then another movement. In a second experiment the ball was screened by a large celluloid funnel, but the movement was still produced.

The committee state that the facts are certain, but incomprehensible. Incomprehensible? So be it! But is the attraction by the earth or by a magnet any more comprehensible? We see a leaden ball fall to the earth and a piece of iron attracted by a magnet and we are neither astonished nor disturbed. These are usual, and we give ourselves up to the illusion that we have understood them.

Ochorowicz has verified a case of telekinesis in full light with Miss Tomczyk (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 369): "A chair behind me suddenly moved. It was a garden chair, light, painted red, and quite open in make. In full light it made little forward movements. / interrogated it. It raised itself on one side and gave one knock, then advanced a few centimetres. I placed my hand against the chair and felt a slight force pushing it.... All took place in full light."

Such facts can be explained only by telekinesis, short of the great absurdity of supposing Ochorowicz the victim of a hallucination.

Dr. Dariex, a careful and experienced observer, experimenting under good conditions with Mme. B., she remaining absolutely still, saw a table weighing some forty pounds give sudden, strong movements, slide along, and upset. Some objects were also projected from a shelf fixed to the wall about eight feet from the floor (A. S. P., 1893, iii, 36).

Dr. Pierre Corneille has reported some extraordinary effects of telekinesis at the house of Mr. X., of Fontenay-le-Comte (Vendee). The sitters were Captain L. and his wife, Professor V. and his two children of twelve and fifteen. These are bad conditions for experiment, for children of twelve and fifteen are quite capable of fraud. These experiments need not be further noticed (Nouvelle Revue, December, 1907).

It is not sufficient that experiments should probably be genuine; we demand more than that, and when dealing with experimentation and not accidental phenomena, we demand repetition. Expcricntia una, expert cntia nulla, The first time that I saw the surprising performances of Anna Roth, the "Blumenmedium," I was dazzled; at a second sitting I was perplexed; at the third I was convinced that the thing was a fraud. I asked Anna Roth to allow a more complete control which would have settled the question. She refused.

Mary Graham, aged about seventeen, was making some tableturning experiments with her mother and younger brother of fifteen. "One evening when we had finished lights were brought and we sat down to read. There was a scratching on the carpet; my mother and I looked up. Could it be our table moving of itself? We began to read again, but the noise was heard again and I distinctly saw the little table move towards us. My mother also saw that it was displaced; all three of us felt uncanny and took the table out of the room.

'This movement took place a second time. I wished to see what the table would do if I were rude to it; so I took a little terrier lying on the carpet and went to put the dog on the table. I was astounded to see the table jump at me right off the floor! The dog was terrified and ran away. The table had moved about six inches and risen off the floor by about as much" (A. S. P., 1892, ii, 307).

Mr. W. J. Crawford, D.Sc, lecturer in engineering at the Municipal Technical Institute, Belfast, has published an epochmaking book on Telekinesis, Experiments in Psychical Science (Watkins, 1919). His lamented death is a great loss to science. In 1916-1917 he experimented in a private circle with a non-

1

I

1 i

, to (m

{IOcm

Figs. 14, 15, 16. — Diagrams to Explain the Theory of an Ectoplasmic Cantilever (After Crawford).

The dotted lines indicate the cantilever. Miss Goligher is supposed to be sitting on the chair, which is upon the platform of a weighing machine. The extruded substance acts on the table at P, sometimes taking a purchase on the ground, as in Fig. 15, sometimes acting as a cantilever (Fig. 14).

In Fig. 16, the ectoplasm is represented as it generally occurs, enlarged wherert proceeds from the medium and where it acts on the table. It is invisible, though it has weight, gives a sensation on contact, and can make an imprint on plastic or coloured substances.

professional medium, Miss Kathleen Goligher. Table-movements were produced without contact of any kind. "I have seen/' says Mr. Crawford, "hundreds of these levitations. Sometimes a chair would rise off its four feet and remain in the air for several minutes."

By different instruments that cannot be here described, Crawford measured the forces proceeding from the medium. When she was placed on a weighing machine he found that during the levitation of light objects their weight was added to that of the medium. In other words, the effect as regards weight was as if the medium were herself lifting the objects. Conversely when the table is pressed downwards as if fixed to the floor, so that a strong man can only lift it with much effort, the weight of the medium on the weighing machine is diminished, in one case by thirty-seven pounds, in another case by fifty-nine pounds.

Crawford drew the inference that a rigid rod proceeds from the body of the medium. This is quite conformable to our experiments with Eusapia. By this means heavy bodies can be psychically raised. According to him there are two modes of procedure according to the weight of the object to be raised. "The cantilever method is made use of for light bodies or when the applied forces are small, and the strut method for heavy bodies or when the applied forces are large" (p. 108). It would seem also (as discovered by Ochorowicz and some others) that other sitters also lose weight slightly during the levitation experiments.

No photographs were taken,1 and precautions such as were used with Eusapia were not taken. But Crawford decided, with good reason, that he would not exhaust his medium; he found that the flashlight greatly disturbed her (p. 147). This prudent conduct cannot be blamed, for he was able to observe the phenomena bv good (red) light, and to verify again and again that there was no contact. He says, "All the phenomena can be demonstrated with the greatest ease to be genuine to the last details/'

Decisive value must be given to Crawford's experiments. Next to those with Eusapia and Home, they are the most complete on record. Professor Sir William Barrett, who was present at one

1In his subsequent work, Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle, photographs were taken, and are here reproduced. Mr. Crawford personally told me that the effects of the flashlight seemed to be upon the medium herself rather than on the ectoplasm. It was possible to take flashlight photographs if the medium were sheltered from the light by a black cape. — Translator's Note.

of these seances, verified that the table moved without contact and that there were raps inexplicable by usual mechanical causes (P. S. P. R., 1919, lxxvii, 335).

We shall refer again later to Crawford's admirable essay, which throws a strong light on the causes and mechanism of telekinesis.1

Mr. G. Arnsburg has seen a fairly heavy walnut pillar table rise from the floor (A. S. P., 1892, ii, 352). "Our fingers were held several inches above it. I succeeded in raising the table without contact just as an iron bar is raised by an electro-magnet. The table swayed slowly in the air for several seconds, before falling heavily back to the ground."

I will here mention some unpublished experiments of my own with three other mediums who gave me fairly good instances of telekinesis. Linda Gazzera, brought by my lamented friend, E. Imoda, was in a room in my house with three other persons. Her hands and feet were firmly held, in complete darkness. A heavy chest weighing some eighty kilogrammes, which was about ten inches from her, began to oscillate and crack, being displaced so violently that I feared it would fall, and I had to stop the experiment.

I copy textually from my notes: "I hold Linda's two hands, her head and knees. A hand seemingly from behind me strikes me heavily. I think I can distinguish its fingers, and this is repeated a second time. I hold the left hand firmly, Imoda holding the right which I frequently verified by touch. The objects were taken from the cupboard behind, a thimble was put on the first finger of my left hand, a sheath (etui) was put on my nose, and I felt fingers touching my nose and face.

"In the last experiment, the best of any, no one was present but

Crawford's skilful studies lead to a beginning of exact knowledge on the nature of the ectoplasm. His leading facts will be found in his last work, posthumously published, Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle (Watkins, London), of which Mr. S. de Brath has given a very good summary {Revue Metapsychique, 1921, i, 191). It cannot be said that the posthumous work contains anything that had not already been established in his previous books, though the photographs in it are new. But in so important a matter fresh verification is always useful, and as the book is posthumous, Crawford cannot be held entirely responsible for its contents and it is wise to maintain some reserve.

It may now be definitely stated that we have abundant demonstration (by Schrenck-Notzing, Mme. Bisson, Dr. Geley, and my own) of ectoplasm as a half-living emanation from the body. (Second French edition.)

&-dc Fonfenat/.

Fig. 17.— Ectoplasm of Linda Gazzera (After Charles Richet and George de Fontenay) Experience of April 19, 1905.

De Fontenay at the right, Argentine on the left. I was holding my right hand continuously without interruption. The hand which appeared high above behind the curtain was released by a fluidic thread from the head of Linda. One could see the nails and all the phalanges. Experienced at home in my library.

myself, Mme. Charles Richet, and Mme. F. I held Linda's hands the whole time (underlined in my notes), so that I can be absolutely certain that she did nothing with her hands. Mme. F.'s chair was taken from her and removed to the middle of the room, then given back to her; I received a flower that I had placed on a shelf as high as the cupboard hardly to be reached by the hand, and higher than the head. I was touched by something from behind the curtain, though I could not affirm that it was a hand.

"Telekinetic experiments succeed well with Linda and she is more easily controlled than Eusapia, for she scarcely moves at all, while Eusapia is in continual jerky movement. In the first experiments the ectoplasmic hand that I felt was cold and stiff; in the fourth experiment it was warm, articulated, and supple."

J. Maxwell observed occasional movements of objects without contact in the case of a certain medium, A. These were infrequent, but as they took place in full daylight, even when Maxwell only was present, and without the usual procedure of spiritist seances, they could be verified under excellent conditions, leaving no room for doubt.

The one phenomenon shown by A., devoid of all mysticism, was as clear and simple as an elementary phenomenon of physiological physics. A. placed her hands near some object and tried to draw it towards her; and sometimes the object moved a few centimetres. When alone with A. I have seen her thus move a fan. This was in full sunlight on a very warm day. The movement was not strong, but the essential fact is that there was movement.

With A., raps were very distinct; when she placed her hands on a table, a walking-stick, or any bit of wood, crepitations and raps were heard and vibrations were felt.

With S. Tomczyk I have seen good instances of movement without contact; she could move and raise up a light ball from a distance.

These experiments made with three different mediums might have been insufficient to convince me of movement without contact, had I not already formed my opinion after my long experimentation with Eusapia. The clear instances of telekinesis presented by A., by S. T., and by Linda in no way surprised me and strongly confirmed my convictions.

I am even inclined to think that phenomena of telekinesis are

not extremely rare, and have been verified fairly often in spiritist seances, but unfortunately under unreliable conditions. Spiritualists publish nothing that has not a doctrinal bearing or is not dramatic. They make the mistake of attaching slight importance to other facts.

Telekinesis is really one of the most important facts in metapsychic science. It is not to be despised because it is elementary, any more than a chemist should despise the law of combination of oxygen with hydrogen because it is an elementary phenomenon. In any case we may claim to have established the proofs of the reality of telekinesis.

However extraordinary it may seem, the many instances above given establish it as securely as any facts of physics or physiology. It may be defined as follows:

Under certain conditions, movements of objects, even of massive and heavy objects, may take place without contact and without the intervention of any known mechanical force.

Various explanations may be attempted. I will mention in the first place an experiment which physicists have unfortunately not studied at all — the magnetometer of Abbe Fortin. If a piece of paper cut to the shape of a compass needle is suspended by a silk fibre inside a glass cylinder, it will turn either towards or away from a hand approaching the glass. Is this phenomenon electric or thermal? I leave this for physicists to decide.1

It is surprising and regrettable that physicists should not have consented to examine carefully this so-called vital action in producing movement.2

M. Joire has constructed a very simple instrument that he calls a sthenometer (Gr. cr &e vo s = strength).

This is a needle turning freely on a pivot over a graduated circle, the whole enclosed in a glass cylinder, hermetically closed, and placed on a base which is made truly level. If the hand is

burbled, Spiritualisme et spirit isme (Bibl. des sciences psychiques), 2d edit., 1898, 160. Stenson Hooker, Sur les radiations humaines, A. S. P., 1906, 315. J. Regnault, Phinomenes odiques et radiations nouvelles, A. S. P., 1905, 174. In the journal of Gaston Mery (Echo du merveilleux) numerous articles have been devoted to this question which is quite in the embryonic stage, and as uncertain as the theories of the astral body, odic effluvia, human radiations, and magnetization at a distance.

H. Baraduc has imagined that each person has a special attractive or repulsive power; and has written a thick book on the subject, quite sincere and honest, but lamentably deficient in critical science (La Force vitale, L'dme humaine. Ses mouvements)

brought near the needle it turns on its axis through a certain angle marked on the dial. M. Joire has been able to eliminate every exterior mechanical cause, the shaking of the floor, any thermal, electric, or luminous influence; and still the movement of the needle takes place.1

Unfortunately, instead of establishing the physica of the problem, M. Joire has studied the effect of different states of health as shown by the deflections. This is premature; the physiology of the reaction should come first. If that is established the pathological applications will follow. It is very desirable that the curious experiments, confused and even ridiculous as some of them are, which Baraduc accepts with such simple faith should be taken in hand and pursued methodically and systematically.

Even if they were successful and it were proved that a certain force is exerted by the body, it would not be at all certain that there is any relation between this infinitesimal involuntary force and the large displacements of heavy objects voluntarily produced by mediums. It is possible, of course, but the causes of movement in the two cases are probably totally different.

Since, moreover, interorganic combustion disengages electricity which can be detected by a galvanometer through the tissues of the hands, there is nothing absurd in supposing that the phenomenon may be electrical. Dr. Waller has shown at the Paris Physiological Congress (1920) that emotions produce changes in the electrical conductivity of the tissues of the hand. It is therefore possible, or even probable, that the phenomena of movement without contact produced by approach of the hand to a narrow strip of tissue-paper or a slip of elderpith may be an electric reaction as in Coulomb's balance.

This physical experiment throws no light at all on the movement of a heavy table, or a large melon, a handbell, a piano, or a bottle; for these are certainly not electric phenomena, and have no relation to any known electric phenomena. Although it is imprudent to advance negative conclusions, I cannot think that any solution of this problem of normal physiology will solve the metapsychic problem of telekinesis.

Still we ought not to neglect the important fact that in full light movements of very light electrifiable objects are produced by individuals who have no mediumistic powers.

tEtude d'une force exteriorisce por Vorganisme vivant, et observations faitcs au tnoyen du sthenometre (A. S. P., 1904, xiv, 242-253 et 1906, 752).

Let us leave these small movements and return to the displacements of heavy objects, massive tables, etc.

If the telekinetic phenomena produced by Slade, Home, and Eusapia Paladino are carefully studied, it will be found that they run parallel with materializations, the mediums that give the one give the other also; and already we can deduce from this that there is some relation between these two modalities of strong mediumship.

On going deeper into the matter we find in all three cases that these movements are produced through a human being and do not exceed the limits of average human muscular power. They are produced easily when the object is light, with more difficulty when it is heavy, and are not produced at all when it is very heavy. To say that the force that displaces objects is limited, and approximates to human muscular power, advances the enquiry somewhat, for if a transcendental force were essentially different in its nature from known mechanical forces there would seem no reason that a weight of a ton should not be raised as easily as a weight of an ounce.

With Eusapia there are all the gradations between movement produced by a materialized hand and movement produced at a distance without the hand being seen. When in half-light a heavy blow is heard on the table it is almost impossible not to think it a blow from a fist. But usually the fist is invisible, and in the same seance one experiences touches without being able to see anything. And when a water-bottle is taken, water poured into a glass, and the glass carried to the lips of the sitters, how can we understand these movements otherwise than as performed by a hand?

Let us, then, advance a hypothesis — permissible in face of these strange facts — that materialization takes place in two phases: a first phase in which the materialization is invisible (paradoxical as that seems), but accompanied by mechanical action, and a second phase with visibility and mechanical action. Everything is then coherent, and we may resume the comparison between the projection of mechanical energy and projection of luminous energy hinted at the beginning of this chapter.

We place a hand before a mirror; its image appears. We place a hand above a balance; if the scale is depressed that is the first phase of materialization; mechanization, not yet made visible. If the projection of the hand should be more intense the hand will appear to sight, at first unshapen and surrounded by draperies, but becoming by degrees more distinctively a hand than it was at first.

We shall return to this hypothesis when treating of materializations. But whatever hypothesis may be advanced to account for them, the fact of movement without contact is undeniable, and it would be puerile to deny it because it is not understood.

However, although the fact is proven as far as we are concerned, it is highly desirable that a thorough study of the facts should be made anew, separating the phenomena from all considerations but those of cold mechanical physics — a delicate task in view of the mental state of the mediums. Unfortunately these phenomena, very rare when intense, are exceedingly undocile to deal with. A medium seems necessary and results vary from day to day. Darkness, or at least deep shadow, is usually indispensable. These conditions make experiment enormously difficult.

But in spite of these difficulties, the excellent experiments made by Ochorowicz with Stanislawa Tomczyk, and by Mme. Bisson and Von Schrenck-Notzing with Marthe Beraud, and by Crawford with Miss Goligher, confirming what had been suspected by Crookes with Home and by ourselves with Eusapia, have established that movement without contact — telekinesis — constitutes the first stage in materialization. This is a fact of primary importance; Schrenck-Notzing has summed up the evidence that can be adduced in support of this proposition in an excellent book that has just appeared.1

In that work theory has no place — which is not less an encomium than a criticism — the facts are set forth in good order, and so well marshalled that they bring conviction.

As to simple telekinesis, the examples already given are sufficient; Schrenck-Notzing adds his own personal observations.

1. Stanislawa Tomczyk gave with him as good results as she did with Ochorowicz. The experiments took place at his own house and he was assisted by Colonel J. Peter, and Drs. Durig, Specht, France, and sometimes other men of science. The red light was sufficient to allow all movements by the medium to be well seen. The light was behind her and her hands were examined with a lens. Her arms were bare.

Under these conditions a celluloid ball (like a billiard ball) was moved by her hands being brought near it, a letter-weighing

xPhysikalische Phaenomene des Mediumismus, Miinchen, E. Reinhardt, 1920.

scale was depressed, indicating a pressure of 50 grams; one scale of a pair was lowered five centimetres, celluloid balls in a glass were moved about, and a teaspoon in a glass was flung out of the glass without being touched. All these were repeated several times. The hypothesis of fraud is absolutely impossible, for the whole attention of the observers was concentrated on the hands, which remained motionless during the movement of the objects.

2. Eusapia Paladino gave some fine instances of telekinesis. At Munich, in the presence of Professor Dessoir, who was profoundly sceptical, when no contact could possibly take place between Eusapia and the curtain, it moved, and various objects placed behind it moved also. Schrenck-Notzing mentions also the experiment made at my house at Carqueiranne, where a billiard ball was brought on to the table. A lamp placed behind a folding screen allowed of all movements by the medium being clearly distinguished: her feet were controlled by Dr. Beretta; Oliver Lodge and I controlled the right side; Mrs. Sidgwick and Schrenck the left side. In this fine experiment a large melon was transported from one place to another; a musical box played; and a decanter full of water was brought on to the table. Another time, still at Carqueiranne, Eusapia put her two hands on Ochorowicz's shoulder, and the table rose off all four feet about twelve inches for four seconds. Flournoy describes an experiment that he made with Schrenck at Munich, Eusapia being the medium, and says that an invisible force maintained the table in the air and caused it to oscillate without its being touched by Eusapia's hands or feet.

3. Mme. K., the wife of a painter, and a non-professional medium, placed her hand lightly on a piano weighing thirteen hundred pounds; the piano was displaced and one leg rose six inches; Mme. K. not touching the piano with her feet or knees. The light was sufficient to see clearly. Mme. K. only touched the lid of this heavy instrument, the lid opened and shut noisily.

4. Willy S., a young student dentist, aged sixteen, a non-professional medium, gave numerous examples of telekinesis, and these, as in the case of Marthe Beraud, were nearly always produced by ectoplasms.

I have mentioned these cases of Schrenck-Notzing's not only because they are independent affirmations of the reality of the phenomenon, but because I wished to specify, as Schrenck has done, the relation between telekinesis and ectoplasms.

As early as 1895, in the course of my experiments with Eusapia, I had verified that simultaneously with telekinetic movements of objects there appeared barely visible and half-formed stumps, like adventitious limbs, so to say, or efflorescences, for which I proposed the name of ectoplasms, a name now universally adopted. In numerous cases what look like rigid rods have been seen proceeding from Eusapia's body. I have often felt on touching her dress a resistant and mobile but formless object, while her hands and feet were being held unmistakably. H. Sidgwick has verified the same thing, as also Dessoir and Sir Oliver Lodge. Nevertheless these observers were extremely sceptical, almost determined to dispute the phenomena. The American experimentalists, perhaps more sceptical still than Dessoir and Sidgwick, say that on three occasions they have seen strange protuberances seeming to proceed from Eusapia's body (in one case from the middle of her back), which subsequently were reabsorbed into her body. These ectoplasmic pseudopods were screened by the curtain; their form therefore could not be ascertained. On one occasion a rod seemingly about thirteen inches long proceeded from Eusapia's foot, approached the table, touched its top, and upset the objects upon it. The members of the Psychological Institute of Paris — Courtier, d'Arsonval, and Yourjevitch — came to a similar conclusion.

Therefore coincident with telekinesis there are ectoplasms — formation of rudimentary limbs, rods, and more or less visible material forces proceeding from the body of the medium.

The excellent observations by Ochorowicz reinforce these facts. He was able to see and to photograph a kind of fluidic thread by means of which the telekinetic phenomena connected with Stanislawa were effected. These forces, which he calls "rigid rays," can bend and displace and can be directed (according to the will of the medium?) to produce mechanical effects. This fluidic thread cannot always be seen or photographed; but quite probably is in a first phase of its formation when it can move objects, though itself invisible.

These rigid rays seem to proceed from the hands or the fingernails of Stanislawa. Close to her hand they appear like a bundle. They cannot be compared to an ordinary thread, a hair, a silk fibre, or sewing cotton, for along them there are swellings and nodes like the waves in a vibrating cord. Their photographic image is discontinuous. This last is a phenomenon of the greatest

importance; for it absolutely excludes the absurd theory of fraud in these carefully observed cases.

To move a round object such as a celluloid ball, a whole number of filaments surround the object like a net, as if one single thread were insufficient for the purpose (Schrenck-Notzing).

Schrenck-Notzing gives (pi. V p. 547) an enlargement of the photograph of this fluidic thread. He inclines to the opinion that it is a bundle of fibres, while Ochorowicz thinks that the fluidic thread acts mechanically by a kind of adhesion. Schrenck's observations with Willy agree with those we made with Stanislawa and Eusapia. Using rigorous control, Willy being dressed in a knitted woollen garment provided by Schrenck-Notzing and laced up the back, the phenomena were similar to those produced by Eusapia and by Marthe Beraud. All the sitters felt a hand which displaced objects near by, while Willy's hands were carefully controlled. This hand was felt before it was seen. It had all the appearance of a living hand. It seemed cold and damp, the skin rather rough, and was obviously larger than Willy's hand. Sometimes the fingers were mere stumps. In one case the effect of sudden light was tried; then the white tissue which had formed round the medium's neck rapidly disappeared with a crawling vermicular movement into the black garment with which he was clothed. The care with which the medium had been searched renders the notion that the tissue had been fraudulently introduced into Schrenck's house quite inadmissible, and, moreover, this ectoplasmic tissue had the singular property of spontaneous movement. (!!) In one instance they were able to get a fragment of this tissue into a tube; it moved actively for some time and then suddenly disappeared (Am 10 jamiar, 1920, hatte Kap. K. einen Teil der Substanz bereits in einem Rbhrchen aufgefangen. Dasselbe bezvegte sich itmerhalb des Glases lebhaft und verschivand blitzartig schnell, als der Beobachter die Rohre zu schliessen versuchte).

The experiments of Crawford show the close relation between telekinesis and ectoplasms better than anything hitherto recorded. All his experiments were made with Miss Kathleen Goligher, a young lady twenty-one years of age, non-professional. The light was from a gas-jet covered with red paper, and was sufficient for all movements to be seen.

At the beginning of the seances raps were heard, light at first, then like hammer-blows, sometimes rhythmic. In some cases the table was raised forty inches above the floor and, without being touched by anything, swayed about in the air.

The new feature in Crawford's experiments was that he placed his medium on a weighing machine and observed the alterations in weight during levitation. The weight of the medium and chair before the levitation was 136.7 pounds. During levitation the weight increased by 3.05 pounds, the weight of the table raised being 2.64 pounds. With other and heavier tables he obtained similar results; the weight of the medium and chair was increased by the weight of the table.

"Even-thing takes place," said Crawford, "as if there were a mechanical link" (invisible?) "between the medium and the table." It is impossible not to connect these important observations with those verified in connection with Home, Eusapia, and Stanislawa Tomczyk.

The substance that produces these telekinetic movements is a kind of lever, cantilever, or rod which emerges from the body of the medium and is reabsorbed into it (see diagrams, p. 430). It can bend, turn, and direct itself, but cannot act at a greater distance than about a yard and a half. It can change its texture, becoming hard enough to give strong blows, and can lay hold of objects. Its dimensions are variable. It can pass through garments and woven materials if they are close to the body, but cloths, paper, and woven materials at a certain distance from the body prevent the action of the force. Its end can adhere to objects to be lifted as though sticking to them. The composition of the ectoplasm could not be determined, and although it certainly proceeds from the body of the medium, no pressure is felt and no reaction is perceived.

The importance of these extraordinary facts cannot be exaggerated. They have been observed methodically and measured in a rigorously scientific temper. The reality of ectoplasms, in accordance with the phenomena presented by Eusapia, Marthe Beraud, and Stanislawa Tomczyk, has been rigorously proved by these experiments of Crawford's.

He gives in his last work — Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle (Watkins, London, 1921) — posthumously published, some excellent photographs, following up his earlier work.1

'See also Schrenck-Notzing's remarks on this, Das Materialisations probleme (Psych. Studien, May, 1921).

The theory that ectoplasms cause telekinesis is probably correct, but in any case, for the phenomena themselves, the proof is irrefutable and ought to carry conviction.

The results given by the different mediums are concordant; each has special personal modes, but the same general scientific inference is to be drawn from the observations as a whole.

It seems fairly well established today that movements without contact must be referred to fluidic projections, at first invisible, that emerge from the body of the medium. The ectoplasms emanating from Marthe, Eusapia, Willy, Stanislawa, and Kathleen Goligher are doubtless analogous to the phantoms that came from Florence Cook, Home, Eglinton, and Mme. d'Esperance. Telekinesis is the first phase of materialisation.

Scientific investigation should now be concentrated upon investigation of this strange and subtle substance which is capable of purposeful movements and such extraordinary changes. It is a whole new world, still profoundly mysterious, and this world is opened up by metapsychic science to physiology and physics.

We shall enter into some further detail when discussing ectoplasmic forms.



(c) Of Noises and Raps

Displacements of objects do not usually show any intelligence at work. It would seem that the whole effort of the force in action is expended in producing mechanical effects, as strong and astonishing as may be possible. But it is quite otherwise with the slight noises produced in table or in other objects near at hand. These noises were first heard by the Fox sisters, and were the point of departure for modern metapsychic science. These noises, produced by intelligent forces, have received the name of "raps."

This phenomenon, at once simple and important, occurs when persons are sitting round a table with a powerful medium. There are shocks in the wood of the table, manifest by knocks, sometimes faint, but sometimes loud enough to be heard at considerable distances.

To avoid admitting the telekinetic power that produces raps, a number of ridiculous hypotheses have been advanced, of which nothing now remains. M. SchifT explained the raps by a movement of a lateral muscle attached to the fibula, possible in his own absolutely exceptional case. It would be senseless to think this general. Mrs. Sidgwick (P. S. P. R., xiii, 145) says that abnormal crackings can be produced by the knee-joint. This also is a most rare exception.

It is, of course, evident that if the medium can touch the table with head, hands, or feet, he can get all the raps he wants. But it is impossible to be certain that the medium is motionless when he is not touching the table!

The raps are produced on contact, but in certain rare cases they are produced without contact, and this is a most essential and basic phenomenon that should be studied with more care than spiritualists, blinded by their wish for miraculous and fantastic phenomena, have given to it. The phenomenon of raps, when unquestionable, is the signal proof that there are forces acting mechanically on things, independently of human muscular contractions. For my own part I consider that this phenomenon, in spite of its simplicity, or rather because of its simplicity, is the most striking phenomenon of metapsychics.

Most frequently, it is true, the raps are produced when the medium is touching the table and they may then be attributed to various causes, but it must not be forgotten that at the moment of hearing a rap the table vibrates, and a shock in the wood can be distinctly felt. If the ear be placed to the table and the sitters are silent, faint repeated raps can be heard like a drumming. In some cases they become rhythmic, like a march or other music, though the medium's hand is quite still and sometimes does not touch the table at all.

J. Maxwell was fortunate enough to be able to observe a medium who gave raps in full light, and he studied her very carefully. "I had the raps so often in strong light that I doubted whether darkness favours their production as much as it does other phenomena. Contact between the hands and the table is not necessary in order to obtain raps. I have obtained them very easily without contact. When they have come with contact, one of the most certain ways of getting them without contact is to keep the hands on the table for a while, and then to raise them very slowly palms downward."

Maxwell obtained raps in restaurants and in railway refreshment rooms loud enough to attract public attention. "In one house, celebrated by reason of the man of genius who lived in it, the raps aroused the suspicions of the caretaker. The tonality of the raps is very variable; they may resemble the noise made by a

mouse, by sawing wood, by rapping on wood with the fingernails, or scratching on woven stuffs." Each of the personalities who claim to intervene has his own special mode of rapping.

These raps cannot be due to crepitation of the wood in process of drying, for they are intelligent. The singular and marvellous thing is that a table untouched by any person emits sonorous vibrations that are not due to chance but mean something. A kind of conversation can be kept up by this means. If the alphabet is repeated, a rap will be given at certain letters and the sequence of such letters will be found to make a word having a definite meaning. A phrase is thus built up. No matter, for the moment, what is said; it is enough to verify (1) that the raps are not due to muscular contractions or any other movement of the medium, since the medium is perfectly still, or is not touching the table at all; (2) that the raps proceed from an intelligence that has something to say.

Mr. W. J. Crawford thus expresses himself on the subject of the raps obtained by Miss Kathleen Goligher (Experiments in Psychical Science, Watkins, 1919). "As soon as the seance begins we hear noises — rap, rap, rap — on the floor near the medium. They become louder and louder, on the table, on the chairs of the sitters. Sometimes they are like hammer-blows, so loud that they can be heard outside, and they shake the floor and the chairs. They can imitate different sounds — the step of a man, the trot of a horse, the rubbing of a match, or the bouncing of a ball."

The facts noted by Hyslop (Am. S. P. R. Journal, xiv, 252-257, 1920) are the more likely to carry conviction in that he is not to be suspected of tenderness in handling objective metapsychics. Dr. Crcery corroborates the facts. An old, ignorant, and blind negro obtained strong raps by placing his hand without the slightest movement on the table, on a violin, or the door. These occurred also when his hands were not in contact with anything and in full light. The raps could be heard five or six feet away. Hyslop says: "We had fair evidence for the existence of raps under unusual circumstances." Mr. Clawson had even better results with the same man.

The reality of these raps is of primary importance, and this phenomenon carries the implication of the whole of metapsychics. If it is established that mechanical vibrations can be produced in matter, at a distance and without contact, and that these vibrations are intelligent, we have the truly far-reaching fact that there are in the universe human or non-human intelligences that can act directly on matter. For this reason, I repeat, it is a mistake not to study these rappings more closely; the rather that the phenomenon is not an exceptional one. No doubt very powerful mediums are required to obtain, without contact, loud knocks that convey a precise meaning, but even with relatively weak and untrained mediums raps can be heard. If the ear be placed to the table crepitations are perceptible, rhythmic or not rhythmic, which have no connected sense, i.e., not conveying coherent phrases, nor even words when the alphabet is repeated, but quite sufficient to establish the fact of mechanical vibrations in the wood. I have obtained these vibrations with many different mediums — with my friend G. F., with Stella, with A., and with L. With Eusapia, the raps were not very frequent, but occasionally (though rarely), they were strong enough to shake the table. With A. they occurred not only on the table but on any object she might be holding. It is true that these were mostly incoherent — an irregular and disordered drumming, preventing any connected conversation. To obtain coherent answers an exceptionally powerful medium is required.

With weak mediums the phenomena are sometimes limited to such knocks, and if the connection with the medium is ignored, one may be tempted to fancy the house haunted. Mr. Hyalmer Wijk, of Gothenburg (Sweden), has made a careful study of a case of this kind. Mme. N. Karin, a hysterical patient, but well educated, heard resounding knockings in the house where she was living, for nearly three months; Dr. Briere and Mr. Wijk heard them also. Then they ceased entirely (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 517-551). J. Hyslop, experimenting with Anna Burton,1 heard raps and is inclined to think them supernormal because they were produced in very varied ways and in very different places, sometimes spontaneously, sometimes on demand by the experimenters. In one case they could be heard at a distance of two yards, while Miss Burton made no movement either with hands or feet. The only possible hypothesis alternative to telekinetic raps is the verv unlikely one of collective sensorial illusion of all the sitters (Journal, S. P. R., xv, 1912, 190).

Selene de C. Verrall, The case of Anna Burton, Journ. S. P. R., xv, 1912, 141.

The following occurrence is very extraordinary and does not fall within the category of other known facts, so that, standing alone, some uncertainty is permissible. Mrs. Davies received a letter from India which she was directed to transmit to Mrs. W. The letter was placed on the mantelpiece. Some time after Mrs. Davies heard clear and loud raps from the chimney-piece. She then placed the letter on another article of furniture. The raps followed the letter. Mrs. Davies's father came and verified this, soon after deciding that the raps came from the letter or from a point so near that they seemed to come from it. This letter announced the death of Mrs. W.'s husband (P. S\ P. R., 1907, xvii, 726).

Sir William Barrett adduces a case of rapping1 which carries complete conviction to any careful reader.

Florrie C, the ten-year-old daughter of a distinguished Irish barrister, having on different occasions produced raps, Sir William tried experiments with her. In some instances the sounds and vibrations were produced from a distance in tables remote from the child. After several weeks of investigation Sir William concluded that all notions of fraud, illusion, or defective observation must be given up. The raps were intelligent, but the intelligence was childish. Florrie also displayed strong telekinesis; a diningroom table to seat twelve persons was raised to a considerable height, one leg only remaining on the floor.

Under equally good conditions with Miss L., Barrett had raps and extensive movements of the table when no one was touching it. One day the table pursued him, as it were, and imprisoned him in his chair without being touched at all. These phenomena were fully reproduced in his own house.

The opinion of F. W. H. Myers carries great weight. This is what he says on the subject:

"Spiritualists affirm that this is a very common phenomenon. I can only say that having taken part in some hundreds of seances, and prepared to note raps, I have often heard them with paid mediums. Experimenting with friends I have often heard crepitations in the table; but only with four or five non-professional mediums, worthy of full confidence, have I heard unquestionable raps answering questions sufficiently well to bring to me the conviction that they were produced by some unknown power" {Human Personality, ii, 454).

1On the Threshold of the Unseen, third edition, Kegan Paul, 1920.

I can entirely confirm Myers's opinion. Unintelligent crepitations are frequent; intelligent rappings are very rare; but the point is to know that the phenomenon, though exceptional, is real; and this cannot be doubted.

It seems to me obvious that progress in metapsychic science is not to be sought in the pursuit of extraordinary phenomena that appeal to the imagination, but in the more modest and less perplexing study of vibrations, intelligent or not, in a table which is hardly touched, or, better still, not touched at all, by the medium.

It would suffice to attach to the board a moderately sensitive microphone with an arrangement for a graphic record. But unfortunately experimenters, and mediums more especially, have no inclination for these arduous and technical experiments. Spiritualists who in their frequent seances have often seen very striking phenomena are more concerned to converse with the dead in rhetorical and sterile phrases than to register the vibrations of a board under conditions of unquestionable precision.



(d) On Direct Writing

Among the different kinds of movements of objects without contact a separate place must be given to a group of phenomena so rare that they may be considered doubtful. I refer to direct writing. This has no relation to automatic writing. In this latter the medium writes unconsciously, but as his hand holds the pen or pencil it is unnecessary to suppose the intervention of an extraneous and superhuman power, since he writes with the muscles of the hand like any other person.

But in "direct writing" a small piece of pencil is placed on a slate, and after a few minutes the slate, blank when placed in a box or otherwise closed up, is found to have writing upon it; e.g., an answer to a question. Nevertheless, the hands of the medium have been in sight, and there was no darkness except in the box containing the slate and the pencil.

The striking case of direct writing observed by Sir William Crookes with Home has already been quoted; but cases of spontaneous movements of the pencil are most extremely rare. Home's case is nearly unique. The experiment is usually performed in quite another way, as was done by Slade and Eglinton. In their case a small fragment of chalk or slate-pencil was placed between two slates locked together, or on a slate shut in between two small

boards. The whole apparatus was held in the hand and placed under the table. A scratching noise was heard, and on withdrawing the box it was verified that the bit of pencil was worn and that there was writing on the slate.

If the slate has not been lost to sight and the observer is skilful enough to make legerdemain impossible, the experiment is decisive; but detestable trickery is possible.

