The opinion has been expressed that the phenomenon is telepathic. This is quite inadmissible: Grabow obtained exact answers on numbers presented to the animal that he himself did not know; and in certain instances the horse gave them when alone in the stable. There is no valid reason for seeking to apply telepathy; the obscure is not explained by the more obscure.

C. de Vesme has advanced the ingenious hypothesis that the process is mediumistic. After all, since there are intelligent raps producible from a table, why should not this power put the brain and muscles of a horse into action much as it causes the vibration in the wood of the table? In this connection De Vesme quotes the instance of a young man of nineteen belonging to an honourable family, who could readily obtain through the planchette in three or four seconds the total of several numbers each of six or seven figures that would have taken several minutes to add up on paper. The subconscious automatism worked more quickly than the conscious mind could do. De Vesme therefore thinks that the Elberfeld horses show a mental automatism similar to that of a medium, and this seems to me worthy of acceptance; though, truth to tell, it is not an explanation.

In any case the automatic arithmetical intelligence of the animals does not imply a metapsychical phenomenon — i.e., the action of an intelligent force differing from known forces.

We know little or nothing about animal intelligence; its limits are undetermined, and if a horse or a dog can do what a child of ten can do, when duly trained, that only indicates a great extension of animal intellectuality.

I should therefore say that the arithmetical intelligence of the Elberfeld horses (if it exists, as it is possible that it does) proves that horses are capable of calculation and reasoning, but that this does not exceed the capacity of young children. It is extraordinary, and seems unlikely, but this has nothing to do with the metapsychic science that opens on unknown worlds.



Chapter VI. Sporadic Cryptesthesia



A. Monitions (I. On Monitions in General)



1. Classification and Definition

A study of cryptesthesia that failed to take account of that form of it which occurs in normal individuals apart from any experimental intention, would be very imperfect both with regard to the fact itself and to the various forms under which it is manifested.

We shall apply the term "monitions" to these phenomena of sporadic cryptesthesia, without implying the hypothesis of an external monitory will; and shall treat them in three sections:

1. Monitions on trivial or serious matters other than death.

2. Monitions of death.

3. Monitions that probably have material objectivity, since they are collective — i.e., observed by several persons at once.

I intentionally do not use the word "hallucination," even qualified by the epithets "veridical," "telepathic," or "symbolical." It seems to me that the term "hallucination" should be reserved to describe a morbid state when a mental image is exteriorized without any exterior reality.

In so-called veridical or telepathic hallucinations the fact of their correspondence with some near or distant external event shows that there is some objective external reality that conditions the hallucination. It is of no consequence whether we know the nature of the force or vibration that transmits the knowledge or not.

In hallucinations produced by absinthe, or alcohol, in those of general paralysis, acute mania, somnambulic suggestion or dreams, there is no external cause; the cause and effect are

According to the Latin etymology, the word "monition" means no more than "warning." This does not necessarily imply an external intervention. ^ It is applicable to a warning proceeding from the subconscious intelligence which acquires, by cryptesthesia, the cognizance of an external event and presents it by a symbol.

anterior to the brain. Hallucination is one of the most distinctive symptoms of insanity, and occurs in nearly all forms of delirium. It occurs after some forms of intoxication; under hashish the illusions are so powerful that they become real hallucinations; belladonna and atropine, in strong but not fatal doses, produce passing hallucinations; long and persistent hallucinations can be provoked in somnambulists, causing them to live in a dream, and dreams much resemble hallucinations. To dream when awake and not to know one is dreaming is to have a hallucination.

But all these have no objective reality. When a dipsomaniac sees rats, hears their squeaks and feels their bites, there are no rats. When a hypnotized subject is told to go up the steps into a house and take a seat on the sofa, there is neither house nor steps nor sofa. When a lunatic hears voices, there are no voices.

It is extremely rare that a person who is neither ill, nor drunk, nor hypnotized should in the waking state have an auditory, visual, or tactile illusion of things that in no way exist. The opinion of alienists that hallucination is the chief sign of mental derangement, and the infallible characteristic of insanity, seems to me well grounded. With certain exceptions (for to every rule there are exceptions) a normal, healthy individual when fully awake does not have hallucinations. If he sees apparitions these correspond to some external reality or other. In the absence of any external reality there are no hallucinations but those of the insane and of alcoholics.

But we must be clear what we mean by objective reality. To take a concrete instance, when Mrs. Bagot at Mentone sees her little dog Judy cross the room at the very time that Judy has died in England, that is not a hallucination in the proper sense of the word, for it corresponds to a real event. But we are not going to imagine that there was a phantom Judy in the dining-room at Mentone emitting the mechanical and luminous vibrations that correspond to sight. The nature of the external fact that caused Mrs. Bagot to see Judy is quite unknown and is probably quite different to the genesis of a phantom. Nor shall I assert, like some out-and-out spiritualists, that Judys astral body has appeared in Mentone. All the same there is some relation between the death of Judy and Mrs. Bagot's vision. It is a monition which, by some mysterious and unknown means, has touched Mrs. Bagot's mind and has presented itself under a form adapted to human intelligence, i.e., by a visual phenomenon.

The vision cannot be compared to that of a lunatic, for there was an objective reality {Judy's death) which was causative of a vision at once veridical and symbolical.

We shall therefore employ the word "monition," not "hallucination," to all these cases of veridical and symbolical hallucination. Thus regarded monitions can be considered as cases of lucidity; but they differ from lucidity as previously studied in two important respects:

1. They are not experimental but accidental. The data that we have on them depend on sporadic observations and not on methodical experiment. We shall therefore define monitions as phenomena of sporadic and non-experimental lucidity.

2. To move the mind of the percipient there must be an objective phenomenon of some kind, but this (in most cases) has no resemblance to usual objective phenomena.

When Mrs. Hutchins sees her husband and hears him call "Mary, Mary" at the very time that he has suddenly died, it must be admitted that this is not the ordinary mechanical and physicochemical fact of a bodily presence that speaks. It is some force in action near Mrs. Hutchins, inducing the image by cryptesthetic emotions whose bearing we cannot fathom. This unknown vibration has reached the mind of Mrs. Hutchins, but would doubtless not have reached another person.

In certain analogous cases the exterior fact resembles ordinary objectifications, and in such cases the effect is produced on other persons collectively. Such is the case of Mme. Telechoff, whose five children and dog perceive the apparition of a little boy, Andre, floating high in the room, the child having died in a house near by. In this case there certainly was a real phantom with real outlines like a living person, which might probably have impressed a photographic plate.

It is therefore not possible to draw an exact line of demarcation between the subjective and the objective; some monitions have a close relation to both.

1. Monitions are all objective in a certain sense, but it is a special kind of objectivity, having no relation to what we call ordinary objectivity.

2. If we use ordinary language and limit the term objective to those physical vibrations that ordinarily affect our senses, we should then say that nearly all monitions are subjective.

While admitting, then, that all classification is artificial, we shall class as subjective all the non-collective monitions in which a visual, auditory, or tactile image has not been excited by an external force similar to the mechanical, physico-chemical forces of the usual known kinds.

But these sporadic monitions have certain characteristics too closely analogous to collective monitions and to experimental materializations for us to be justified in eliminating the hypothesis of a materialization, or something like it in many monitions, simply because it may be convenient to do so. This will be discussed later on; in this present chapter we shall class monitions among subjective phenomena, setting theory aside for the present, but taking note of the two double characteristics (1) that they are accidental and not experimental, and (2) that they are connected with some real fact inaccessible to the percipient by normal means.



2. Conditions Necessary that Monitions Should Be Regarded as Such

The first condition is the honesty of the witnesses. With the rarest exceptions it is not possible to suppose that the stories have been invented. It is possible, though unlikely, that among the thousands of cases reported, perhaps ten may be due to practical jokes, but I am disposed to think that there has scarcely ever been intentional invention.

But, on the other hand, inaccuracy is as certain as honesty; and this is a source of grave error.

A story that comes to us at secondhand, having passed through two or three persons' imagination and memory, the one inventive and the other treacherous, is sure to be distorted. In spite of oneself, there is a tendency to make it more effective by adding details and suppressing others. In the great majority of cases the honesty is indubitable, but so is the inaccuracy. Wilful deceit there is none, but self-deception is almost always present.

I will instance the log of the three-master Jacques Gabriel. The log contains the following annotation, but written with different ink, "On arriving at the Mauritius, we learn the death of the wife of the second officer, M. Penaud, deceased on the same day and hour at which the noise was heard. " In the log under date of July 17th the entry states that while at sea the voice of a woman had been heard on board. Now the register of deaths at Paimbceuf indicates that Mme. Penaud died on the 16th of Jane. So that Captain Mangot, commanding the vessel, no doubt in good faith, but disregarding the necessity of being absolutely accurate in all matters of science, mentions the events as simultaneous, though there was a month's difference between them.

There are certainly a number of cases analogous to the foregoing which, as no written evidence was taken at the time, must be accepted with considerable reserve; but these reservations have less to do with the fact itself than with the moment of its occurrence, which, if coincident with the event, would show a connection in time with the objective reality. It would therefore be injudicious to reject all the cases in which written documents are wanting; for memory, which is unreliable as to precise dates, is trustworthy for many other details.

It is also remarkable that monitions, whether because of their somewhat dramatic character, or because they have been spoken of several times, or for some deeper reason, are deeply graven in the minds of the percipients, so that they are still vividly and accurately remembered after the lapse of even as much as thirty years. There will be some distortion, but the fundamental facts are correctly retained; the narrator may forget whether the lamp was alight or not; whether the weather was bright or rainy; whether he spoke aloud or kept silence; but the essential facts remain. No doubt illusions arise on the exact correspondence of hours, or even of days, but these variations from accuracy, though they are not unimportant, do not change the essential character of the fact itself.

Another point, which is perhaps more difficult to clear up, is whether in any given case it was actually impossible that the event in question should have reached the mind by any ordinary channel. The following case, for instance, seems one in which a subconscious rememberance seems sufficient to account for the facts:

Mr. Newnham during a walk at Haughton had gathered some violets for his sick wife. Twelve years later as he was walking in the same place, and thinking of the violets once gathered there, his wife said to him, "I smell violets in the hedgerow/' This was no doubt a subconscious remembrance by Mrs. Newnham (or possibly a coincidence). She said, no doubt quite sincerely, I had completely forgotten the fact," but the subconscious memory forgets nothing. Each case should be considered on its own merits.

Very often the facts relate to a person who is very ill or near death, and then a real hallucination is possible; but this possibility must not be exaggerated.

In the first place, people in a normal state do not have hallucinations; and further the correspondence between the hour of death and that of the monition is sometimes so exact that it could not be due to so-called hallucination. Mr. Williams knew that his brother-in-law, George, was very ill, nearly dying. One morning he sees George standing at his bedside, and says to his wife, "I have seen George, he came for a minute at sunrise. " Far away George had died in the arms of his father, who wrote, "The sun was rising when my dear son left us for the heavenly country." The event and the monition were so exactly simultaneous that Mr. Williams's knowledge of the imminence of death detracts very little from the authenticity of the monition.

O. Houdaille, called to the bedside of his grandfather who was very ill, while in the train taking him to Mirecourt, hears a deep sigh, gets up, looks at the time, and says to his brother, "It is one o'clock; grandfather must be dead or dying." Mr. B., the grandfather, entered into the death-throes at one o'clock precisely.

Even if we eliminate the cases in which a death is expected (and there is no real reason to eliminate these), there remains a large number in which the recipient of the monition believed the person in question to be in good health or very slightly indisposed. Thus when Mr. Z. left his young friend, B., B. was in perfect health. They had talked of trivial matters; but two hours later Z. had a terrible dream at the very moment that B. committed suicide.1

Monitions might be divided into the foreseen and the unforeseen; the former being those in which death was expected, and the latter those referring to a person in good health; but the resemblance, not to say the identity, of the modality of monitions in both cases is such that the phenomenon is the same in both, and it would be irrational to reject monitions of likely facts merely because they are likely. Is the knowledge that a brother is very ill or dying sufficient to evoke his wraith? "Expectant attention,"

*I have an impression, which should be supported by statistics, that monitions are more frequent in cases of suicide. This might be better known if families in such cases were not careful to conceal the fact and the circumstances that led to it.

to which so many marvels are attributed, really cannot cause a normal person to see a phantom or hear a voice. We must admit monitions into the realm of metapsychics even when they refer to probable facts.

Nevertheless, whenever a simple and non-metapsychic explanation of a so-called monition can be given, it should be adopted. In other words, the criticism of such facts must be stringent.

Mr. Barwell and Mr. Earle see their friend W. at the carriagedoor of a train just as it is starting: W. waves his hand to them and the train is soon out of sight. At that very moment W. falls into syncope at his own house. But this is not enough to establish that W.'s double was in the departing train. It is possible that some stranger who resembled W., seeing signs made to him, answered them by a wave of the hand. This is much more likely than an apparition; and this story must be rejected.

The very interesting case of M. Noell, a young student of pharmacy at Montpellier, who saw one night his dying sister and heard her call to him, has a defective side. Telegrams had been sent him announcing his sister's serious illness, but the servant who should have given him the telegrams had stupidly put them into a drawer. One cannot be certain that M. Noell had not half unconsciously opened the drawer and read the telegrams. This is improbable but not impossible, and is sufficient to make the case a doubtful one.

Even if the non-metapsychical explanations are far-fetched and unlikely, provided they have some remote possibility, they should be accepted in preference to calling in mysterious faculty.

Thus the Rev. Mr. Killick thinks he hears a voice telling him that his daughter Etta is drowning. Some months later he learns that at that very time his daughter had been in imminent danger of being drowned. May not this be a fact of paramnesia — an illusion of memory? May not the extent of the danger to Etta have been exaggerated?

Dr. J. Smith hears a voice that repeats three times, "Send some bread to James Candy.'' He then sends the bread to Gandy, whose existence he barely knew of, and finds him in a state of destitution with his children crying for bread. But it is possible that Dr. Smith may have known that Gandy was in want, and the auditory admonition does not necessitate cryptesthesia.

Each particular case of sporadic cryptesthesia needs special critical treatment. This has been done by the authors of Phantasms of the Living, by Camille Flammarion, by the editors of the Annates des Sciences Psychiques, and by the members of the S. P. R., before making public the facts recorded by them. This criticism, however, has not prevented.the publication of some weakly authenticated facts that seem to support others that are quite well evidenced. I have endeavoured in this book to give only those against which little can be alleged; but among them are still too many which, if they stood alone, would have little weight.

As our chief aim is to prove the reality of cryptesthesia, we shall not take into account vague and indefinite cases. Thus, Mrs. Martyn has an intense feeling of horror and fear. She cannot assign any precise bearing to this; but next day she learns that someone that she had not seen for two years has died. This cannot be called a monition; it may have been one, but there is no evidence for it.

The same must be said of the Rev. Mr. Wilson, who had a vague but strong sensation of illness at the moment of death of a twin brother. He says, "It was a panic fear; I shuddered as at the approach of death. My brother died fours hours before this painful terror seized me." That this may have been a monition is probable, seeing that the brothers were twins; but Mr. Wilson did not connect his sensations with his brother, and it is best to infer simple coincidence.

Vague monitions which do not connect with a real and definite fact totally unknown to the percipient do not amount to lucidity. We shall not call them monitions, for that word is reserved to the cognizance of a real external fact. Cases in which the percipient has no intimation of the external fact itself cannot be taken as monitions.



(a) The Hypothesis of Chance Coincidence

It is frequently objected that monitions may be due to chance. It is desirable to give this objection its full weight:

"In France, as in England, there are about 1,500,000 deaths annually and a thousand times as many falls, wounds, serious accidents followed by fainting, loss of blood, and delirium, without counting the minor incidents to which many monitions refer. This amounts to some 1,500 million cases. As the enquiry extends over about sixty years, there are about a hundred thousand millions of casual events that might be the subject of monitions. Now it has only been possible to ascertain (with difficulty) about 500 cases; therefore, the ratio of actual to possible cases is 500 to 100,000,000,000, or 1: 200 millions or less. Therefore, alike in France and in England only one two-hundredth-millionth, or at most, one hundred-millionth, of possible cases has eventuated. This is a very small number; so small as to be negligible, and if all the inaccurate observations, exaggerations, and defects of memory were eliminated, the number would be much smaller still."

This objection somewhat resembles the remark of the sceptic who, seeing the votive offerings of sailors saved from shipwreck to their patron, St. Peter, asked to see the names of those who were drowned in spite of their prayers.

N. Vaschide has been unable to obtain any positive evidence, and his criticism is not very logical. Against all common-sense he begins by denying probabilities, and then he invokes the calculus of probabilities to support his denial. Then having found on enquiry that the hallucinations he has brought forward were not veridical, he concludes that the enquiry conducted by the S. P. R. is illusory. But in such a case science cannot prove a negative and I can only compare his negation to that of the Venetian doctor who replied to Harvey that the heart might be heard to contract in London, but that in Venice nothing of the sort could be perceived.

We may reply to Vaschide:

(1) The number of persons who for one reason or another, by indifference, laziness, inattention, or fear, do not give their testimony is very great; but the number who have never heard of the enquiry is enormous. Among the persons passing through Trafalgar Square in London or the Place de l'Opera in Paris, what is the ratio between those who have heard of an enquiry on veridical hallucinations, to those who have not heard of it? And how many among those who have heard would think of writing a letter detailing personal matters? Add to this the country-side and the small towns. It may be boldly averred, not one in a hundred thousand. The ratio stated by M. Vaschide then falls from one hundred-millionth to one ten-thousandth, which is very different.

(2) If, instead of taking cases of telepathy and monition bearing on various matters, we take only the premonitions of death, accepting only those that are well supported by documentary evidence, we have about 250 cases. In sixty years there are said to be 750 million deaths. If, then, only one in ten thousand persons have been moved to action by the enquiry, the ratio is 250: 75,000, say, 1: 300. Such would seem to be near the proportion of those who have had a monition among those who might be expected to reply. One in three hundred is a small proportion, but it is no longer a negligible quantity.

(3) The hypothesis of chance coincidence becomes quite untenable when the time of the monition coincides exactly with the event. J. has left his friend F., when F. was very slightly indisposed. Soon after J. in his own home sees the apparition of F., and asks his wife, "What is the time?" Twelve minutes to nine." "Then," says J., "F. has died at 8.48. I have just seen him." In fact, F. has died between 8.35 and 9 o'clock, or, taking the mean, at 8.45. The times are exactly concordant.

The probability that J. should have one, and only one, hallucination in his whole life and that it should agree exactly with the time of F.'s death can be calculated fairly closely. There are 96 quarter-hours in the day, and 365 days in the year. Taking twenty years of J.'s experience that gives a probability of 1: 700,000 against a chance coincidence. C. Flammarion (Rcvuc Spirite, February, 1921), by another method of calculation reaches a probability of 1: 800,000,000 on the same data; but whether 1: 700,000 or 1: 800,000,000, the moral improbability of chance coincidence is the same.

Is it not much more rational to suppose that J., who is neither a mystic nor subject to hallucinations, had at that precise minute a monition, the only one in his whole life, because some actual vibration awakened his dormant cryptesthesia?

(4) But the chief reason for dismissing the hypothesis of chance is that the details furnished by the monition are often so exact and so abundant that fortuitous coincidence is out of the question. Mme. Escourru at Paris, looking at the portrait of her son, sees the left eye bleeding and the eyeball out of its socket; and on the same day her son, a captain of Zouaves, is wounded in this very manner at the assault on La Puebla in Mexico.

Mrs. Green dreams of two young girls driving in a one-horse carriage drowned in a lake, their two hats floating on the water; and at that very time, the girls, one of whom is her niece, having gone for a drive with a friend, are drowned in Australia on the other side of the world, the two bodies being located by the hats floating on the water. The probability against chance is so great that it amounts to moral certainty.

We never get mathematical certainty; it is not certain that a bag of type emptied on a table will not fall into the first line of the Iliad. This combination exists among those that are possible, but if it should occur no one would believe it due to chance.

(5) In a small number of cases some objective phenomena have accompanied the monitions; a fact which makes the hypothesis of chance quite untenable.

Mrs. Bettany sees an old woman in a long cloak crouching on the floor. Mr. Bettany sees the same, and both recognize Mrs. X. Is it possible that there was no external phenomenon? Is it likely that this was unconnected with the death of Mrs. X. at the same hour?

(6) The calculus of probabilities has been alluded to above. This method of reasoning, which may be misleading even on mathematical and abstract data, becomes entirely illusory when the complex and intricate factors of a monition enter into the problem. In such cases common-sense rather than calculation will give the solution. Mr. Wingfield Baker writes in his diary the initials of his brother, and adds "God forbid"; at the same hour his brother is killed in the hunting-field. The most elementary good sense will see a connection between the two events, and that the apparition of his brother was not due to chance.

If this were an isolated case it might, at a stretch, be supposed that chance might have induced an hallucination in a normal person (however rare such may be) and that this hallucination might have occurred at the moment of the brother's death. It is vastly unlikely, however. If the case were unique we might hesitate to draw a definite conclusion; but there are some hundreds of such cases and the repetition of similar coincidences excludes all idea of chance.

That at roulette the red should come up 80 times out of 100 on a particular day is enormously improbable, but no inference could be drawn; but if this, or something like it, occurred for a month, we should be quite sure that the wheel had been tampered with. In the case of the wheel the probability is calculable; in that of monitions it is not, but the inference is the same.

The study of experimental lucidity showed that the human soul has a mysterious faculty in virtue, of which cognitions other than those due to normal senses and sensations reach the mind. The study of accidental lucidity leads to the same conclusion and corroborates it with irresistible force.

There are other channels of cognition than the habitual ones.

That is a conclusion as well established as the most certain facts of physics, chemistry, and mathematics.



3. Conditions Under Which Monitions Occur

Monitions occur under the most varied conditions, nevertheless there are some points of similarity that will appear from the accounts here following:

(1) Visual monitions are usually in the shape of a nebulous form which allows of the background being seen through it, though in some cases the form is opaque enough to hide objects behind it.

(2) The details of the face are often very clear; the eyes, nose, wrinkles, the colour of the hair, and a happy or sad expression are readily distinguishable. Everything occurs as if the vision were of a living person in the material world.

(3) Sometimes the apparition speaks; sometimes a voice is heard. Sometimes, though more rarely, there is a tactile phenomenon, so that the impression of reality is complete, all the senses contributing to the perception. Often what the vision has wished to say is clearly understood without any spoken words having been definitely heard; just as in a dream one knows what is said without any remembrance of particular words.

(4) Very often the monition takes the form of a dream; and then the dreamer remembers the exact circumstances of the dream. Often the dream awakes the sleeper, without immediate disappearance of the apparition. Sometimes (rarely) as in Dr. Orsi's case, the monitory dream is repeated several nights in succession. It often takes place between sleeping and waking {Borderland, Maury's hallucinations).

(5) Recognition is variable; often the form seen is ill-defined, so that the percipient does not at first connect it with any particular person, but experiences vague disquiet and pain. Little by little the notion becomes more precise, and the visual phenomenon is linked to some person without that person having been actually recognized. He knows and understands that the apparition refers to that person without being able to say how he knows it.

This difficulty in recognition is interesting, for it seems to prove two successive intellectual processes. In the first, the mind is influenced by some vibration that has a meaning, though the meaning is obscure. Then the sensation becomes more precise, but in order to become so — that is, in order to be transferred from subconsciousness to consciousness — it must be manifested under some form fitted to our mental constitution — a vision or an audition. Till then it will not be understood. Recognition has been secured because the subconscious has adopted the means of a symbolical hallucination to reveal a fact to the conscious self.

When recognition is doubtful cryptesthesia must not be invoked; it is therefore of primary import that the percipient should have formally related the monition to a witness, or better still, should have written it down, before the actual fact referred to has come to him by normal means.

Without clear recognition lucidity cannot be admitted. For instance, Mrs. Woodham sees -a figure before her so distinctly that she wakes up and says aloud, so as to be heard by her sister sleeping with her, "Who are you? What do you want?" The next morning she hears of the death of an old servant of whom she was fond, and then she says, "It was she whom I saw last night"; but as she did not recognize the apparition at the time, the case is not evidential. Paramnesia is relatively common, and no good faith in the narrator can bring this to his knowledge, for the genuineness of the mistake constitutes paramnesia.

(6) Monitions usually refer to death, often to illness or serious accidents, and sometimes to trivial matters. But these latter also are monitions; and the monition of a trivial fact is as interesting per se as the monition of a death or a disaster, for monitions of trifling facts are often accompanied by precise details which certainly show cryptesthesia. For instance, M. sees his wife talking with a beggar who is holding a broom. The monition is in itself quite meaningless, but interesting from the abundance and accuracy of its detail.

(7) There is no essential connection between the vividness of the hallucination or the dream and the definiteness of the monition. There may be scarcely any, just as a very slight and passing internal perception may reveal an important fact, whereas sometimes a vision may be very clear and perceived very vividly without being certainly referable to cryptesthesia. This contrast is very apparent in dreams; some are very vivid, having all the semblance of reality, but mean nothing at all, while other very transitory dreams may convey monitions.

(8) The period of latency between the event and the monition is variable. F. Myers thinks (while admitting it to be merely a hypothesis), that the telepathic impression is immediate, but that this impression remains latent in the mind of its subject, only emerging to consciousness after a certain interval either as a waking vision, or as a dream, or in some other manner. In nearly all cases, he says, in which a veridical phantom has preceded death, it has been a case of illness but not a case of accident; and then the process of dying, with its coma and convulsions, may originate the telepathic impression and so precede the stoppage of the heart that constitutes actual death.

In cases of accident the vision is almost always subsequent to death. Myers cites two cases (p. 273) that seem exceptions; but one of these may have been -a premonition and in the other (suicide) Myers thinks that the mental agitation of the unhappy man may have been sufficient to cause the telepathic phenomenon.

If the time-curve of post-mortem apparitions were drawn, it would show a very rapid fall within the first few days after death, becoming almost nil for longer periods.

Possibly when the casual fact is near, the lapse of time is less than when it is distant.

M. Warcollier, analyzing the data of telepathic monitions given in sundry enquiries, draws up the statistics given below:

He has also compared cases occurring in the waking and sleeping states, including in the latter, fainting, coma, and dying.

Agents |

194 64 per cent.

106 36 per cent.

161 54 per cent.

139 46 per cent.

Percipients Women

Agent.

Percipient.

No. of cases.

Waking. Waking. Sleeping. Sleeping.

Waking Sleeping. Waking. Sleeping.

He concludes, borne out by many personal investigations, that sleep or the borderland between sleeping and waking is favourable to telepathy or clairvoyance.

(9) Visual apparitions are of short duration; they usually last but a few seconds. Prolonged apparitions are very rare; such as the case of the sailor Spring, who saw on his ship, during a storm, the apparition of his father (who had just died on shore) which remained beside him on the bridge for two hours.

(10) Some monitions are certainly objective, and are seen by several persons. It is then very difficult, almost impossible, not to admit some external phenomenon similar to those ordinary phenomena that affect our physical senses.

M. Lemonnier, a chemist of Rennes, hears a loud noise at his door, repeated thrice. He gets up and see nothing. In another house, one of his friends, M. Nivot, at the same moment hears a similar noise that wakes him up; and both think of the death of one of their mutual friends who was dying at that time. Must we suppose that both, at different places in the town, were similarly hallucinated? Is it not likely that if other persons had been there they, too, would have heard the noises?

The son of Lady X., aged twelve years, sees a form passing across the room, and says, "Mother, it is the major.'' Lady X. also sees the form. I have already quoted the case of Mme. Telechoff with her five children and her dog Moustache. Mr. and Mrs. Bettany both saw the old woman in their room. Mrs. Paget and her two daughters heard the steps of Arthur in the passageway. Colonel Wynyard and Mr. Sherbrooke both saw Mr. Wynyard. Mr. Weld and his daughter both saw Philip Weld, who had just died, walking in the avenue. The mother and sisters of Colonel Aylesbury heard his voice. Mr. and Mrs. L. both heard the voice of their son. Mr. Done and Rosie both heard Mrs. Eustance call them successively by name; but it does not appear that Mr. Done heard Rosie called, nor that Rosie heard the words, "Uncle, uncle."

All the same, in spite of appearances, the existence of an exterior fact of the same order as ordinary exterior facts cannot be admitted in all these cases of collective perception, for the hallucination was different.

(11) Monitions are certainly nearly always entirely subjective. Mr. K. of the Royal Military College sees a woman being carried along, but his companion sees nothing. Mrs. Taunton sees her uncle in the theatre between her and the orchestra. Mr. Taunton, sitting beside her, sees nothing and asks, "What is the matter with you?" Mr. B., taking tea with his son and daughterin-law, sees a face at the window, but they see nothing. Miss Stella sees a boy enter; she speaks to him and offers him a cloak. Dr. G., coming in at the moment, is astonished and says, "To whom are you speaking?" Kate Sherman sees the apparition of her brother, and speaks of it to her sister resting by her side, but Elisabeth Sherman sees nothing.

Very often the percipient asks the people of the house if they have seen anyone entering or leaving, but almost without exception nothing has been remarked, though in all these different cases the apparition presented all the semblance of reality.

The cases of veridical and purely subjective apparitions are so many that if we had not to take into account experimental materializations, we might conclude that all monitions are subjective. But this term also must be cleared up, and this I shall endeavour to do in the section that follows.



4. The Symbolical Form Taken by Monitions

That a percipient should have cognizance of a fact that the normal senses cannot reveal, it is obvious that there must be some exterior vibration that has influenced his mind. It is therefore possible that these vibrations should affect others, and therefore that the monition should be perceived by more than one person. Certain collective monitions, but not all, can be thus explained. Mr. Done heard the voice calling, "Uncle, uncle," and at the same moment Rosie hears, "Rosie, Rosie." It would seem that the call heard by two persons at the same time used a different symbolism for each.

The tendency to symbolism dominates all monitions. Even in our normal state, as a great poet has said, we move in a forest of symbols. Cryptesthesia has to express itself symbolically to touch our consciousness: everything happens as though monitions, assuredly of mental origin, had to be adapted to our modes of understanding by being dramatized; and the fertility of invention displayed (for it is invention), which eventuates in a monition, must move our wonder.

E. Bozzano, to whom are due so many acute studies on different points of metapsychics, has emphasized their symbolical forms; for instance Mrs. Thompson, whose faculty of cryptesthesia is strong, instead of giving the name "Merryfield" says Merry,.man, Merry thought, Happy field (A. S. P., 1907, 638).

I have mentioned the curious story of Mrs. X., who, being alone in her home, endeavoured while in a lucid state to discover the name of the person who had been speaking to me. She saw a well-defined human form which gave the name "Henry"; but at the same time she saw a herald-at-arms with a halberd, dressed in mediaeval style, stopping other spirits anxious to come in from entering the room so that there might be no confusion with "Henry." 1

Mme. A. one night dreamed that there was a ring at the door, and that the housemaid entered looking frightened, and said, "Madame, it is Death." Mme. A. felt that Death must not be kept waiting, and forthwith sees a coffin, and in it Mme. Gaston Tissandier, of whose recent decease she was ignorant.

Jean Jules Bigard dreams that he has died and that a clerk at the town-hall showed him the certificate, causing him to laugh. That same night his uncle Jean Jules Bigard was mortally wounded in the war.

The Rev. Mark Hill sees a man advancing on him so threateningly that he seizes a glass from the table and throws it at the head of the phantom.

Emma Burger sees her fiance enter her room, the door opening and shutting.

Longet, professor of physiology in the Paris Faculty of Medicine, sees in a dream his friend Cloquet (whose decease was unknown to him) entering the room, throwing his books on the floor, and saying, "Now I need nothing more."

Mr. Weld sees his son Philip walking on the road with two imaginary persons.

Miss Barr sees a hand drawing her bed-curtain and on this hand a ring which she recognizes as belonging to her cousin, Captain X., who was dying in Canada from an accident (Phant. of the Living, 416).

Mr. Brighton in his cabin on shipboard has a very complicated dream in which he sees two forms descending on the ropes that held the hawsers of the boat. They eniit musical sounds that

,C. Richet, Presidential discourse to the S. P. R., February 6, 1905, Proc. S. P. R., iv. The name Henry was quite correctly given against (calculated) odds of 1 '.20.

change into cries of triumph when they have cast the boat loose. The boat then drifts away and is caught by a gust of wind. Mr. Brighton wakes up, jumps from his berth, and goes on deck. The night was calm, but the moorings were frayed. With much trouble Mr. Brighton and his friend found other ropes and secured the boat, thus avoiding a great danger. This is a good example of a symbolical dream, but it is difficult to see in it any cryptesthesia; probably a subconscious idea of the peril reached Mr. Brighton's consciousness under this dramatic form (P. S. P. R., viii, 401).

Symbolical, too, is Mrs. B.'s dream of a dinner at which all the guests were talking except her uncle, A., who remained dumb. The same night her uncle died; she knew this only by his silence at the dinner (A. S. P., xvii, 728).

Mrs. J. Adam sees the form of her grandmother, who shows empty eye-sockets to indicate that she has died (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 716).

The excellent examples of symbolism collected by Bozzano show the fertility of the subconscious mind for imaginative detail; a fertility much greater than that of the conscious mind. This is well seen in the infinite variety of dreams.

Mrs. Johnson, whenever she is perturbed by anxiety, sees a swarm of flies that fly up to her face. The illusion is so complete that she does not distinguish them from actualities.

Mrs. Wilve, wife of Dr. Wilve, sees a white and a black horse galloping across country with a carriage in which is seated a person about to have a serious accident.

Very often the idea of death is presented by coffins.

Mrs. A. sees in a dream her mother with three bouquets. She reaches out to take the second, but it falls to the ground. Mrs. A., who has three brothers, thinks of the second. He died shortly after.

An unlikely case of symbolism is reported by Flammarion (La Mort ct son Mystcrc, p. 95). Mme. Marechal at Paris, in a nightmare between sleeping and waking, sees a spectre that takes her by the arm and says, "Either your husband or your daughter must die. Choose!" After a terrible struggle she mentally decides to sacrifice her husband to save her child. Five days later, M. Marechal, till then apparently in good health, dies. Flammarion says, "I questioned Mme. Marechal and her daughter separately and I have no doubt of the authenticity of the story."

Mrs. Wickham while undressing feels a hand on her head and neck; cold lips are lightly pressed to hers and a voice says, "Adieu, adieu!"

M. Bard sees Mme. Freville walking in the cemetery. Mr. Tones sees a coffin and in it the form of his sister. Mme. Beaugrand hears the sound of a terrible storm at the time when her husband perished by shipwreck. Mr. T. sees a tomb on which is inscribed the name of his friend. Lieutenant V. dreams that his friend, Lieutenant L., has fallen into a shell-hole, is surrounded by enemies, and is calling for help. Mrs. Paget hears the heavy step of her servant in the corridor stopping at the place where a gas-jet ought to be shut off. Mrs. Matthews sees Suzanne raise the bedclothes and lie down by her. The wraith of Spring's father comes on the bridge of the ship, touches his son on the shoulder, and says, "Look to your helm, Joe." Mr. Noell hears his sister call to him in a plaintive voice, "Come, Louis, do come."

All these appearances were monitions, for they corresponded with deaths and actual events which the percipients could not have known by any normal means.

It is probable, or even certain, that in all these cases there was no external physical fact that would have affected a photographic plate, a microphone, or balances. A phonograph would have shown no record. The monition, whose mode of genesis is quite unknown, was conveyed to the percipient by a symbol; and a symbol is the converse of reality. It corresponds to a reality, but it is not the reality itself.

One fact that seems to prove that hallucinations are symbolical, in most cases, is that visual hallucinations are clothed; they wear a usual (or an unusual) garb. They open and close a door. They raise the bedclothes. If there were a materialization we should have to admit a simultaneous materialization of clothes and divers objects, appearing at the same time as the phantom. That may indeed be possible, as is shown by experimental materializations, but it is certainly simpler to consider that this is not the case, but that all takes place in the mind of the percipient. It seems obvious that most monitions are entirely subjective, though I should not venture to say that all are; but those that are clearly objective are rare, or at least the objectification does not present the ordinary luminous, mechanical, and thermal phenomena. Even when the objectification is seemingly complete its objectivity must nevertheless be held doubtful.

Some minutes after the death of Mrs. L., three persons who were in the death-chamber — Eliza W., Charlotte, and Dr. G., who had attended the dying woman — heard for several seconds three women's voices singing softly, like the sounds of an seolian harp. Eliza W. even believed that she heard the words, "The strife is o'er, the battle done." Two of those who had left the room reentered to hear the music. The night was still, and there was no one outside. Nevertheless, the phenomena were certainly subjective, firstly because Mr. L., who was present, heard nothing; and secondly, because each of the persons who did hear the singing heard it in a different manner (Phantasms of the Living, i, 446).

This case is particularly interesting, for it shows that there may be hallucinations which are very definitely subjective though perceived collectively.

We have not distinguished monitions received during sleep from waking monitions, for the borderland between sleeping and waking renders any hard-and-fast classification impossible. Very often they begin during sleep and are completed on waking; and sometimes conversely, though this is rare. Sometimes the percipient is startled into a kind of stupor which curiously resembles sleep.

Even when the percipient remains awake the vision resembles a dream; the same state of "credulity" (as De Rochas felicitously says) supervenes — an absence of astonishment which accepts the most unlikely things. The only difference between the mental state when dreaming and when awake is that in the former state the sleeper cannot fix his attention on the real objects around him; he is carried into an imaginary world and cannot correct the divagations of his thoughts by actual sensations. This absence of control is the essential feature of dream-states. The dreamer does not know where he is; he is not reminded of concrete realities by the mechanical and physical energies of the world about him. He cannot fix his attention and has no directing will. The mental state of those who receive a monition is very similar.

It would be absurd not to regard most monitions as subjective in the same way as dream-images are subjective. If in a dream we were to see a funeral, a coffin, and a brother in that coffin, it would be outrageously absurd to suppose any objectivity in these things. Why, then, should it be otherwise with a veridical hallucination? It is just a waking dream: and to say, "But

I was wide awake" is not a sufficient reason for thinking the phenomenon objective; as if it were impossible to build up a dream because one thinks oneself awake.

Whether produced in sleep, when awake, or in an intermediate state, monitions are always symbolical. The details of the vision have no more importance in themselves than the strange and fanciful details of dreams. Nevertheless, the narrator is perfectly right to insist on detail, for along with the essential monition there are often very precise accessory facts that define the meaning. In this singular admixture of reality and fancy, lucidity seizes not only on the central fact, but also shows a curious predilection for the accessory circumstances. Therefore the narrator should omit nothing, lest the most interesting point might perhaps be passed over in silence. And this applies to dreams also.

The symbolic character of monitions should therefore excite no surprise; nor should too much importance be attached to the form of the symbolism. The important thing is the lucidity, the cryptesthetic perception of a real phenomenon — a reality which imagination dresses up with details that are sometimes true to fact, and sometimes fanciful. I think that no better description can be found for monitions that take a hallucinatory form than to call them "waking dreams."



5. Monitions and the Telepathic Hypothesis

Although the authors of that admirable work, Phantasms of the Living, consider monitions as cases of telepathy and incline to think that there has often (if not always) been some effort on the part of the agent to transmit his thought to the percipient, I am far from holding this to be the most rational hypothesis.

Obviously it can be only a hypothesis. It is very easy to say A.'s thought is transmitted to B.; but as I have already indicated more than once, this proposition is by no means simple. Therefore, in our present state of ignorance of laws and causes, I adopt a hypothesis that prejudges nothing, and am content to keep within the limits that circumscribe our imperfect knowledge by saying B., by some unknown means, knows what A. has thought of, but he also knows much more: he knows what A. has thought of because that thought was itself a fact; and he can know that which no one has thought of: he knows that which IS.

I say to Stella, "Tell me the names of two servants who were about me in my childhood." She answers (but only next day), "Melanie." I was not thinking of Melanie; for fifty-five years the name has never recurred to my memory. Is it not simpler to suppose that Stella has perceived the reality — the fact — than to think that she has read a subconscious thought in the deepest recesses of my mind? As a matter of fact I had two other names in mind — Dorothy and Louise. I did not think of the third woman, "Melanie/' at all.

When Mrs. Green perceives the death of two girls in Australia, is it likely that these two girls who had never been to England and did not know Mrs. Green (who was the aunt of one of them), should have thought of Mrs. Green with such vigour that this vibration travelled twelve thousand miles to her instead of affecting their parents quite close at hand?

Mme. Freville barely knew M. Bard. Mr. Phibbs sees his dog Fox mortally hurt at the foot of a wall. It is much more reasonable to suppose that the notion of the fact reached his mind than that the soul of the dog went and acted on the brain of the man.

In fine, accidental lucidity, shown by monitions, leads us to the same conclusion as experimental lucidity — that human intelligence has methods of cognition different from those we habitually use.

It is possible that in some families there is a hereditary aptitude for lucidity: Dr. Ludwig1 cites an interesting case of the kind — two sisters and two brothers who all four show unmistakable cryptesthesia.

M. Emile Laurent (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 161-176) has very properly emphasized certain general characteristics of monitions, especially that they seem to cease as soon as the monition has been understood. It seems that the mode selected by the manifesting power is just that which is most certain to arouse attention and least likely to pass unperceived. One is tempted to admit that among all possible forms of manifestations a kind of choice has been made of the one that could not have arisen from usual causes. M. Laurent concludes that there is intelligence at the back of monitions. This conclusion seems inevitable, but it does not follow that the intelligence producing the monition is not that of the percipient himself. Still, it must be admitted, provisionally at least, that monitions are in most cases selected, and well selected, whatever hypothesis we may adopt to account for them.

xTelepathische Veranlagung (Psychische Studien, xlvii, 1920, 456)-

Let us add: (1) They are symbolical; (2) they impress the mind of the percipient so powerfully that all details are long remembered, and (3) that they do not cause the fear that might have been expected.

Space does not allow of mention of the legends that tell of monitory dreams in antiquity.

Sophocles, it seems, had such a dream: Hercules appeared to him and indicated where a golden crown that had been stolen would be found. Sophocles obtained the reward promised to the finder.

A celebrated monition to Swedenborg claimed the attention of Kant: Sir Oliver Lodge (Survival of Man) mentions this case: Mme. Martiville, widow of the Dutch ambassador in Stockholm, was summoned by a goldsmith to pay for a purchase made by her dead husband. Mme. Martiville, convinced that the money had already been paid, has the impulse to write to Swedenborg enquiring if by conversation with her deceased husband he could get at the truth of the matter. Three days later, Swedenborg went to Mme. Martiville, told her that the money had been paid, and that the receipt would be found in a certain drawer of a specified bureau in a certain room. The room, desk, and drawer were all correctly indicated.

From all these facts we conclude yet again: There are unknown vibrations in nature which set human intelligence in motion and reveal facts that the senses cannot convey.

If telepathy be admitted there is only one word to be changed in this sentence; we need merely say "vibrations of human thought" instead of "unknown vibrations." But to limit cryptesthesia to the perception of human thought-vibrations is to narrow its applications and change its entire nature.



6. On the Frequency of Monitions

Monitions are much more frequent than is commonly thought. When speaking to a sceptic on this point, he often replies, "I could tell you a very singular fact of this kind that happened to me personally": and this "singular fact" which seems to him evidential he will accept and recount with simple-minded satisfaction, while rejecting with infantile inconsequence other facts perhaps more evidential because they did not happen to himself.

I do not hesitate to say that some instances of telepathy, more or less evidential, could be gathered from nearly all families. If they are not made public it is from a praiseworthy feeling they are not sufficiently evidential, or from fear of ridicule, but chiefly from reluctance to make the effort to confirm them by exact dates, official certificates, and other data without which a mere story has no great value. They seem nearly independent of age and sex; they occur in the daytime rather less frequently than at night on going to sleep or in dreams.

We may be confident that this psychological phenomenon is much more common than is supposed, and when a person who has received a monition is no longer branded as a visionary, instances will be multiplied. It is sheer idiocy to refer them to a colossal fraud repeated for fifty years in all lands, or to a series of gross illusions. It is equally unreasonable to think them due to chance; the mass of precise and unlikely details given precludes this supposition.

We are, then, in presence of a known but unexplained phenomenon: and is not this the character of most of the facts with which science is concerned? When a new case of monition is reported it is almost always possible to find analogous cases, just as a botanist can always refer a new plant to known species. This is characteristic of scientific knowledge. Experiment has given indubitable proofs of cryptesthesia. Observation has confirmed this proof by different but equally sure methods.

To show how interesting these monitions are, I have collected in the following pages a considerable number. They may be monotonous reading, but in a scientific work it is necessary to present a large number of duly attested facts. Their value appears by their quantity as well as by their quality. It is not possible, and it would be absurd to suppose, that all these facts authenticated by laborious cross-examination and investigation should be false or erroneous. Every unbiassed person who reads the evidence will acquire the certainty that neither lying nor exaggeration nor chance can account for all these monitions.

The facts are derived from various sources. The chief of these sources, the most abundant and the most strictly tested, is the investigation carried on by the Society of Psychical Research. The scientific and conscientious authors of Phantasms of the Living, Messrs. Gurney, Myers, and Podmore, have collected in that book the results of their observations. They were, with good reason, very exacting on the evidence, and have admitted, with few exceptions, only the accounts of the percipients themselves; and in cases of monitions of death they have taken the trouble to verify them by the certificates of death.

The investigation of the S. P. R. is a model of perseverance, courage, and scientific accuracy that other investigations can scarcely hope to rival. These enquiries are still in progress. Each number of the Proceedings contains data of extreme interest and no author can hope to produce even passable work without consulting these documents and those of the American S. P. R.

Another valuable, courageous, and scientific work was undertaken by Camille Flammarion through the Annalcs politiques et litteraires, the Petit Marseillais, and the Revue des Revues. He obtained 4,280 answers; 2,456 negative and 1,824 positive. Many imperfect answers had to be rejected, and out of the remaining 786, only about fifty deserve to be permanently retained, for, imitating the procedure of the S. P. R., it was resolved to eliminate nearly all that were not first-hand evidence. These are detailed in Flammarion's excellent book, L'Inconnu et les Problcmcs Psychiques (Paris, 1900), which abounds in facts and details, though occasionally admitting some of doubtful authenticity.

The English enquiry elicited 5,705 answers, out of which there were 590 subjective hallucinations and 423 in which the hallucination would seem to have been exteriorized. But statistics of this kind are inconclusive, for most persons, if they have no interesting information to give, do not reply at all.

The little investigation that I conducted through the Bulletin des Armees during the war, brought me about a hundred replies, of which some thirty are worth preserving, and among these there are seven or eight of very great interest that I shall quote further on.

To the above must be added the facts indicated in special publications— the Annates des Sciences Psychiques, the Psychische Studien, Light, the Religio-philosophical Journal, Luce e Ombra, the Banner of Light, and others.

The aggregate is a weighty mass of documentary evidence. Considering each case separately, we find some imperfect and only vaguely demonstrative; but that is inseparable from all observational science. Observations can never give the same certitude as experiment, and to warrant any conclusion a very large number must be compared.

If, after carefully reading the instances here adduced, the reader cannot decide that monitions exist, i.e., that there is a relation, the working of which remains a mystery, between an external event and its cognition which neither our senses nor our reason can account for, if, I say, this conclusion is not accepted, then all observational and historical science must equally be rejected, and we must doubt the existence of aerolites or that Charlemagne ever lived. Monitions (sporadic lucidity) confirm experimental lucidity, and the latter corroborates the former.



II. On Certain Monitions (Not Collective) Other Than Monitions of Death

William James cites and analyzes a most telling example of cryptesthesia. A certain young girl, "Bertha," disappeared from Enfield (New Hampshire) October 31, 1898. The search for her was keen, more than a hundred persons explored the woods and the shores of the lake. She had been seen to go to the Shaker Bridge, but had not been seen beyond. A diver searched the lake, especially near the bridge, but found nothing. In the night between the 2d and 3d of November Mrs. Titus, at Lebanon, five miles from Enfield, dreamed that she saw the body in a certain place. The next morning she went to the Shaker Bridge, and indicated to the diver "within an inch" where the body should be found, head downwards and so that only the india-rubber sole of one of her shoes could be seen. The diver, following Mrs. Titus's directions, discovered the body, caught in the branches six yards under the water, which was very turbid. "I was much impressed," said the man; "corpses in the water do not frighten me, but I feared the woman on the bridge. How can a woman come five miles and tell me where the body was? It was in a deep hole head downwards, and in the dark I could hardly see it."

The Rev. Mr. Drake went one day to see a friend, Mr. Wilson, whose daughter Jessie had gone to India a short time previously, and said, "Your daughter has reached India today, June 5th." Mr. Wilson replied that that was impossible, the ship not being due till the 15th, at soonest.

"You disbelieve me?" said Mr. Drake. "Well, take your diary and note the date." Mr. Wilson then wrote in his diary, "Rev. J. Drake and Jessie, June 5, 1860." It has never been known how Mr. Drake could have had this dream or vision, or, as he used to say, this clairvoyance, that had made him so sure.

M. Bachelot, of Angers, receives from Sergeant Morin a little ring of aluminum such as soldiers in the trenches used to make to beguile the hours. On the night of the 7th of March, M. Bachelot is awakened by a sharp pain in the ring-finger as if it were held in a vice. Half asleep, he drew off the ring and next morning thought he had lost it. He felt that something had happened to his friend Morin and spoke of his fears to three persons, Mr. G., Mr. S., and Mrs. S., who certify these details. On the following day he heard that Morin had been wounded (not severely) at 4 a.m. on the 8th of March (Bulletin des Armccs). The story is curious but may have been a coincidence.

In the night of September 23d-24th, Mrs. K. writes to her mother: "What are you all three doing? I hope you are well, though I have dreamed these days that mother had broken her leg. Think of that!" Now on Saturday, September 23d, Mrs. K.'s little girl who was on a visit to her grandmother (Mrs. K.'s mother) had broken her arm. In the dream, among various disturbing incidents, Mrs. K. clearly distinguished her mother's house and felt that some accident had befallen one of her own people. This also is not very evidential, since there are two marked errors, the broken arm of the child instead of the broken leg of the mother.

Mrs. Claughton has given a good instance of lucidity, checked with great care by Myers. This interesting story must here be much abridged. It is even more remarkable as a premonition than as a monition.

Mrs. C. lived at No. 6 Blake Street, in a house that belonged to Mrs. Appleby. This house, it would seem, was haunted by Mrs. Appleby's mother, Mrs. Blackburn, who had died there. Mrs. C. had been there five days when she saw a form resembling Mrs. Blackburn. "If you doubt that it is myself," said the phantom, "here is the date of my marriage in India." The phantom then indicated to Mrs. C. that she should go to Maresby to see the tomb of Mr. George Howard, whose name, dates of marriage, and decease were given; that in the church register would be found the entry of the death of Robert Hart; that on arrival at Maresby Mrs. C. would not be asked for her railway ticket; that she would lodge at the house of a dark man, Mr. Wright; that the wife of this Mr. Wright had a child buried in the cemetery; and that there would be white roses on the graves. Everything fell out as predicted. It will be observed that Mrs. Claughton had never heard of Maresby nor of any of the persons mentioned.

Mr. Frederic Marks, at Newhaven, sleeping on his bed during the day, saw his brother, on a small sailing vessel about to founder in a storm. He saw his brother and another man in the boat, the one baling out water and the other trying to reef the sail. The vessel righted herself and seemed to come to shore. On the same day, 200 miles away on Oneida Lake, Charles Marks and a friend narrowly escaped drowning in a terrible storm on the lake.

Dr. Marcel Baudouin, whom I know to be a careful and scrupulous observer, had the rare opportunity of observing a case of monition. Being on a visit to Mrs. X., he sees her burst into tears during a casual conversation at half-past eleven in the morning. An hour later news is brought that her sister is seriously ill. She had been taken with a fatal attack of angina pectoris at the very moment that Mrs. X., in the presence of Dr. Baudouin, had this paroxysm of weeping, which was the more surprising as Mrs. X. very rarely gives way to tears. Dr. Baudouin certifies that he had never before or since seen her weep in this manner (A. S. P., 1900, x, 129).

Captain M. was wounded August 27, 1914, by a bullet in the chest about 11.30 p.m., and left for dead. The same night at that same hour, his daughter, aged fifteen, who was sleeping soundly, woke up and told her mother, "Mother, father is wounded but is not killed.,>

Mr. Fryer hears his brother's voice call him "Rod" so clearly that he searches all over the house. Some days later his brother tells him that on leaving the train he had a bad fall at the same hour when the voice was heard and called "Rod."

Mrs. X., who is not mystical and has no tendency towards occultism, goes to sleep for a few moments during a journey by train, and sees a friend riding, putting his horse to clear a low wall, and having a fall which had no serious consequences. This was true, but could not have been foreseen by any ordinary means.

Mrs. West, travelling in Norway with her father and mother, dreams that she sees them in a sledge come into collision with another sledge going in the opposite direction. She sees her father causing the horse to rear. She wakes up, crying, "Father, father!" In the morning on her father's arrival she tells her dream, saying, "Then you are not hurt? I saw the horse rear, but I could not see if you were hurt or not." In fact, Mr. Cowes (Mrs. West's father) in descending a hill crossed another carriole, and to avoid a collision made his horse rear so that it fell backwards. Mr. Cowes's son, who was following, was much disturbed and only reassured when he saw his father unhurt.

In the hospital at Munich, a soldier of the Aviation Corps under treatment for a pulmonary affection wakes up in the middle of the night and finds himself in the yard; he has been walking in his sleep and dreamed that he had flown to Schleisheim and there saw his friend N. on sentry duty who showed fear. A. then said in his dream, "Do you not know me?" to which N. replied, "Oh, it is you; what are you doing here?" Next morning A., convinced that there must be some reality at the back of his dream, writes an account of it to N., and at the same time (as proved by the post-mark), N. writes to say that being on sentry that night, he saw A. and said, "Is it you, Joseph?" adding that he heard his voice distinctly. The two letters crossed in the post.1

Miss May Lichfield, reading one night in her room, suddenly feels that some one has entered. She sees nobody, but feels a long and tender kiss on her forehead; and raising her head perceives her betrothed standing behind her chair, bending forward to kiss her again. The figure then disappeared, but she had been able to see his features, his tall stature, and broad shoulders quite distinctly. That day he had a fall from his horse, was insensible for some time and ill afterwards. At the time of the accident he thought, "My little May, let me not die without seeing you again."

Mrs. Paget goes down into her kitchen at 10 p.m. and suddenly sees her sailor brother coming towards her and about to sit down, the water shining on his oilskin and cap. She thought he had been wetted by rain and said, "Miles, where have you come from?" Then in his usual voice he said, "For the love of God do not say that I am here," and vanished. "I was very frightened," says Mrs. Paget, "and wrote down the date, without telling anyone." Three months later, Miles returned, and told his sister that he had been almost drowned in the harbour at Melbourne, having been taken out of the water insensible. The date was correct, but allowing for difference in longitude there was an interval of ten hours between the accident and the apparition.

Mme. A. Dudlay of the Comedie Franchise has reported various

xZwex deutsche Professoren gegen die Telepathic, par S. Clericus, Psychische Studien, xliv, 191 7, 35<>.

cases of monitions relating to the war, but the details are too few and not sufficiently precise (A. S. P., 1919, xxix, 13-16).

Major Kobbe one day felt impelled to visit the cemetery of Greenwood, six miles from New York. Neither he nor any one of his family was in the habit of going there; but on reaching the place he found his father who had come for the disinterment of a member of the family. The letter sent by his father asking him to be present had not reached him. He arrived just at the right time.

A case of monition at a seance by Mme. d'Esperance is reported in Light (1905, p. 43); it is very complex, being accompanied by a materialization.

On April 3, 1890, Mme. d'Esperance wrote automatically, without knowing why, <fSvens Strombcrg"; neither she nor anyone present knew the name. Two months later, at a seance at which Aksakoff and BoutlerofT were present, it was said that Stromberg, a native of Jemtland, had died on March 13th at Wisconsin. At the same time there appeared (?) on a photograph (spiritist?) a face which Mme. d'Esperance's guide declared to be Stromberg's, and stated that he had not died on the 13th, but on the 31st of March. After long and laborious enquiry it was found that a certain Svens Ersson, born in Jemtland, had emigrated to Canada and had died on the night of March 31st. The photograph was identified, and it was proved that the news of his death could not have reached Gothenburg, even by telegraph from New Stockholm, the town in Canada where he died, at the time that the name was given at the seance.

Bozzano considers this case one of the best substantiated, but this seems an exaggerated view.

The following case is specially interesting, for it presents the very rare feature of several successive apparitions expressing a single monition:

Miss Minnie Wilson, aged 17, educated in a Catholic convent in Belgium, when about to kneel at her prayers, saw her Uncle Oldham coming towards her. She was extremely surprised. Her uncle asked her to pray for him as he had shot himself by reason of a disappointment in love. The next day, and the day following, the vision was repeated; she felt the touch of his hand, but did not hear his step nor hear the bench creak. He disappeared, not suddenly, but by becoming slowly indistinct. She learned later that he had killed himself with a pistol-shot for a love-trouble (A. S. P., 1908, xvii, 266).

Monitions sometimes come as formal warnings. Hyslop (Am, S. P. R., 1907, 487) has authenticated the curious story of Mr. McCready, editor of the Daily Telegraph, who had a very strong impression one Sunday while at the church of St. John (N. B.), of a voice saying to him, "Go back to the office." The order was so peremptory that he ran from the church to the office, arriving to the great astonishment of his sub-editors. He there found a petroleum lamp blazing in his room and throwing out such clouds of smoke that everything was covered with soot.

With reference to this and other similar monitions Bozzano discusses whether such occurrences involve the intervention of an external intelligence.

Mme. Tonelli, at San Marino, when trying to sleep one night, saw her son thrown down by a passing carriage and much injured. She rose, went nearly four miles along the road to Costa di Borgo, and found her son at the foot of a declivity dowrn which he had rolled. Thus, despite the darkness and the storm and notwithstanding her age, and without having any normal reason for disquiet, she got up in the middle of the night to go to his assistance (A. S. P., 1905, v, 170).

Mr. Searle, a lawyer, saw in his rooms at the Temple, as clearly as in a mirror, the figure of his wife; her head thrown back and her face pale as death. At that same hour, in consequence of a great fright, Mrs. Searle had fainted. She had never fainted before.

At Syracuse (N. Y.) Mr. Lee suddenly woke up from sleep, having seen his father fall downstairs with a great noise. His father was bishop at Iowa. He got up, waked his wife, asking her if she had heard any noise, and noted the time by his watch, 2.45. At that hour Bishop Lee at Iowa fell on the stairs and died soon after.

Mr. Hunter Watt dreamt that a cast of the Venus de Milo, relegated to a corner of his garden, had fallen, the head being broken off by the fall; which was found to be true (Myers, Human Personality, i, 379).

Mrs. Severn woke at 7 a.m. feeling a sharp blow on her mouth as if her upper lip had been cut and was bleeding. Putting her handkerchief to her mouth she was surprised to find no blood. At the same moment her husband who had gone for a sail on the lake was caught by a gust of wind causing the handle of the rudder to strike him on the mouth, cutting his lip and causing much loss of blood (Chevreul, loc. cit., 53).

Mrs. Swithinbank saw her young son, aged ten, standing on a high wall facing her window. She jumped up to ask him why he had left school. The boy looked at her with fear in his eyes and vanished. Search was made without result. A few minutes later one of his classmates brought him in a cab in a fainting condition. It seems that in class he fell back insensible, saying, "Mother will know."

Mrs. Richardson, in India, dreams that her husband, 150 miles distant at the siege of Multan (1848), has been severely wounded and she hears his voice saying, "Take the ring from my finger and send it to my wife." About the same time (9 p.m.) the general fell severely wounded and said those precise words to Major Lloyd. General Richardson recovered from his wound.

M. Gignon, military commissary at Aurignac, was playing a game at cards with friends at a cafe. Suddenly he got up much disturbed and wrote to his wife, "I have heard an anguished cry. Oh, tell me what you want! Is there trouble? Is there danger?" At that hour, 9 p.m., December 22, 1878, M. Gignon's little granddaughter had been severely scalded by a bottle of over-hot water placed in the cradle.

Mrs. R. writes in her diary on March 15th, "Last night, March, 1874." She had seen the head and shoulders of a man in a cloudy form close to her. She cried out, "It is Captain W." The captain, who was a friend of hers, was then in New Zealand, and had promised that if he were to die he would appear to her. The time of the vision agreed exactly with a carriage accident which injured Captain W. so severely that he remained a long time insensible and made but a slow recovery (Tel. Halluc., p. 184).

Mr. Phibbs, at Ilfracombe, dreamt between 10 and 10.30 p.m. that he saw his dog Fox stretched out, hurt and dying, at the foot of a wall. He told his wife of this. At that time his dog had been worried by two bulldogs and fell dying at the foot of a wall (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 428).

M. J. P. was walking and reading, in the daytime, and suddenly saw a comrade (Louis) falling backwards with his hand on his heart with the usual gesture of a wounded soldier. He told this vision to his family. Some days later he learned that Louis, having accidentally wounded his brother when out shooting, had fainted with emotion, saying, "If Charles dies I shall kill myself" (Flammarion, 155).

M. Martial Lagrange dreams that he has a cancer of the stomach and is operated on by Dr. Guinard. The same night, Dr. Guinard (a hospital surgeon) could not sleep on account of severe toothache and passed the night working at a treatise on the surgical treatment of cancer of the stomach. He naturally thought of visiting M. Lagrange, who was not, however, his usual dentist. As soon as he entered M. Lagrange's consulting-room, the latter said to him, "I dreamt of you last night; I had cancer of the stomach and you were going to operate on me" (A. S. P., 1893, iii, 140).

Mr. Haggard had a very painful dream, feeling suffocated as if drowning. Gradually the dream took more definite form. "I saw," he says, "my dear old dog Bob stretched out among the reeds of a pond. Bob was trying to call me, but failing to reach me by his voice, sent me the idea that he was about to die." In the morning he thought little of the matter, Bob having been quite well the day before; but the dog did not reappear, and some days after it was found that he had been struck by a passing train and that the shock had thrown him into a pond close by. The accident took place on the night of the dream (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 424).

Count Nicholas Gomanys, a medical officer in the Greek Army, was sent to the garrison of Zante. As he drew near to the island he heard a voice saying in Italian, "Go and see Volterra." He says, "This phrase was repeated so often that I turned dizzy and was alarmed, thinking it an auditory hallucination. There was nothing to make me think of Volterra who lived in Zante, whom I had not seen for ten years, and to whom I had never spoken. At the hotel, while unpacking my bag, the voice continued to harass me. Just then they sent to tell me that M. Volterra had come. He begged me to go with him at once to see his son who had been taken very ill" (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 424).

Commandant Grima went with his wife to a conversazione at the Sorbonne and Chatelet, on the 14th of July, 1915, in Paris. On returning to St. Denis, Mme. Grima perceived that she had lost a diamond while in Paris. Next morning her young son said, "I dreamt last night that a little girl had found the ring and brought it to you. Did you lose it, mother?" The children had been asleep when their parents came home. That, however, is not the strange part of the story, for possibly the children when half asleep had heard their parents speaking of the lost ring. Three months later, by a great chance, a girl of twelve belonging to a good family in Paris found the ring by the steps of the Sorbonne. This is an extraordinary premonition (A. S. P., 1895, xv, 434).

Mrs. Bagot, at table d'hote (Mentone) sees her little dog Judy that she had left in England crossing the room. Without thinking she exclaimed, "What! Judy here!" She told this to her husband, her two daughters, and her mother, and there were jokes on Judy's ghost. She also noted the fact in her diary. It was ascertained that there was no dog in the hotel. At the same time (there is some doubt about the date) the dog had died suddenly in England (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1909, xix, 322).

Mr. G., of Boston, sees the living image of his dead sister, and notices a scratch on her right cheek. He speaks of this to his mother who nearly fainted on hearing it, for it seems that Mr. G.'s mother, preparing her daughter's body for burial, had made a scratch on the face, and no one but herself knew of the accident (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 322).

Mr. G. Parent, mayor of Wiege, dreams that the farm at Chevennes is on fire; he makes futile efforts to run there, and sees the farm burnt down. Awaking, shaken and trembling, he tells the dream to his wife. Next day a part of the farm was destroyed by fire.

The next story (from the unpublished enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees) is so evidential that I give in extenso the letter received from Captain V., January 14, 1917:

"On September 3, 1916, during the attack on the Chemin-Creux, between Maulpas and Clery, Second Lieutenant D., of the 13th battalion of the Alpine chasseurs, was wounded by a bullet in both arms, and left the line to have his wounds dressed. That evening and for fifteen days he was missing at roll-call, and was sought in vain in the dressing-stations. On September 18th the 13th battalion returned to the same sector, the front line having been advanced three kilometres. During the night of September 18th-19th Second Lieutenant V., an intimate friend of D.'s, saw in a dream his friend D. dying in a shell-hole at the edge of the Chemin-Creux, under a willow tree, reproaching him vehemently for letting his best friend die unassisted.

"V., a cool-headed and sceptical officer, was nevertheless obsessed by his dream, and went to his commandant, S., who at first did not take the matter seriously, but in the end, in kindness, and to finish with the affair, gave V. a short leave to search the place. V. came to the Chemin-Creux and there found the surroundings as seen in his dream. At the foot of a willow was a stick with the label, 'Here lie two French soldiers/ There was nothing to connect this with D., but on opening the grave, D.'s body was found, which had been buried about fifteen days before. This strange fact could be attested by the officers of the 13th, but they have other things to do."

Dr. Ollivier, at Huelgoat (Finistere) went on horseback at 8 p.m. on a dark night to visit a patient in the country, and was thrown from his horse, breaking his collar-bone. At nine o'clock, his wife on retiring to rest was seized with violent trembling, called the servant, and said, "My husband has met with an accident and is killed or hurt." It may have been a monition, but chance coincidence is possible, or even likely, in this case.

A soldier, a peasant of La Creuse, told M. Raymond Mialaret, in very simple words, that one morning his little girl of seven had seen him in a dream lying on the ground bleeding from the left arm. She told the dream to her mother, who said it was a nightmare. That same night the soldier was wounded in the left arm (Enquiry through the Ball, des Armees).

Mr. Fraser Harris, who had gone from London to lecture at St. Andrews, went on Sunday to a small family hotel, and suddenly saw the front of his house in London. His wife was on the doorstep speaking to a workman who was holding a large broom. She seemed troubled, and Mr. Harris made out that this poor man was asking for help. At that very time Mrs. Harris was speaking to a poor man seeking work, who offered to sweep the snow from the steps and said he had nothing for himself or his children to eat. On returning to London, Mr. Harris found the man just as he had seen him in vision (Chevreul, 45).

Lieutenant G., at the front near Reims, had not heard from his wife for three days. One night he dreamed that he saw her pale as death on her bed. He woke up sobbing and waited impatiently for news. Three days later he learned that on the night of his dream she had a narrow escape from suffocation by fire in her room, which scorched all the bedding. Mme. G. felt the result of the semi-suffocation for a long while (Enquiry through the Bull, des Armees).

A little girl of ten, in a dream, sees her father, Lieutenant D., coming home on leave from the front, and added that he had a rubber cape, which no one knew of his having. Next day the lieutenant arrived, a month before he was expected, wearing a waterproof that he had bought on his way home (Enquiry through the Bull, des Armees).

Professor S. Venturi, in charge of the lunatic asylum at Garofalo, left home for Pozzuoli, but under a strong presentiment, determined, in spite of difficulties, to return to his house at Nocera. He found his wife in great agitation. Their little girl had a dangerous attack of croup, and Mme. Venturi had cried out for her husband in her distress (Tamburini, A. S. P., 1893, iii, 292).

M. Keulemans, a well-known artist of bird-life, narrates some interesting instances of cryptesthesia. Without exactly going into trance, he visualizes very clearly the head or eyes of a bird when drawing. But the cases of telaesthesia quoted by M. Keulemans are not precise enough to carry conviction, though interesting by their symbolical form (A. S. P., 1893, xii, 217).

In closing the foregoing very incomplete record of monitions not followed by a death, I may be permitted to mention one personal to myself. It is not a case of cryptesthesia, for the dates do not correspond and there was no recognition; but the psychological phenomena resemble those accompanying lucid monitions too closely to omit them here.

I was in Italy during the second month of the war, where I felt the duty of carrying on an active propaganda for our holy national cause from the beginning of the war. I was living on the first floor of the Quirinal Hotel; it was almost deserted and I was, I believe, the only guest on that floor. On the night of September 22-23, 1914, I was awakened from sound sleep by three knocks, very clear but not very loud, on the door of my room. I sat up in bed and switched on the light. Again the three knocks were heard. I called out, "Come in." Then, behind the door but seemingly close to me, I heard a woman's voice speaking low and plaintively, "Doctor, doctor," drawling the last syllable. Then thoroughly awake, I said aloud, "Very well, I am coming." My answer was almost automatic; for my first passing thought was that someone wanted medical help. But nothing followed. I opened the door (but of that I am not quite sure), and seeing no one, I scribbled down the exact time, 1.20 a.m. (for I had just thought it might be an hallucination) and being in no way alarmed, was able in about half an hour to go to sleep again, though my five sons were then at the front exposed to the gravest dangers. As the voice had been a woman's, and my daughter-in-law was expecting her confinement, I thought it might be a monition of that event. I even wrote down this in my note-book.

It was not any such monition, and it cannot be referred to any specific event. Six days before, on the afternoon of the 17th of September, my son Jacques had been seriously wounded and taken prisoner, though the news had not then reached me.

By this experience I became aware of the character of an auditory monition. (It matters little from the psychological point of view whether it were lucid or not.) If I can judge from my own case, it is as clear as any phenomenon of normal life. When I first woke up, being between waking and sleeping, there was some uncertainty; but in a few seconds the exteriorization was precise, and it is to be remarked that all the details were firmly fixed in my mind. They doubtless may have become slightly twisted, but the general facts remain unchangeable.

It is absolutely impossible to prove that this was a monition of the wounding and capture of my son; nevertheless, I am convinced (without asking anyone to share my conviction) that the monition was real. The analogy with innumerable observed cases is close. It is the only hallucinatory monition that I have ever received. I have, however, in the course of my life had two flashes of cryptesthesia, one when awake, the other in dream.

One winter evening in 1899 I was working in my library in the Rue de l'Universite. My wife was at the opera that evening with my daughter Louise. Suddenly, about 10.30, I thought for the first time in my life, and without there being any smoke at all in the room to suggest the idea, that there was a fire at the opera. The impression was so strong that I wrote down "Fire! Fire!" and a few minutes later, thinking this not enough, I wrote "Att," meaning "attention." Not much disturbed I returned to my work. Towards midnight, when my wife and daughter returned, I at once asked them, to their great surprise, "Was there a fire?" My wife answered, "No, there was no conflagration, but we were much frightened. Between the acts some smoke rose from the orchestra; there was a rumour of fire; I left the box quickly to learn what was the matter, telling my daughter, When I come back leave at once without waiting for anything/ They reassured me and the performance went on without incident."

This is not all. At the moment when I wrote "Fire" in my notes, my sister, Mme. Ch. Buloz, whose room opens off mine, fancied that mine was on fire. She went to the door, but feeling that her fears were groundless, stopped, saying to herself, "No, I will not disturb my brother for such a silly fancy."

Therefore my sister and I had an impression of fire at the same moment; that is how I can best describe the vague notion that came to me while my wife and daughter were at the opera nearly a mile distant at which a real danger from fire arose. Is this a coincidence? Was there at my house an odour of smoke too faint to be consciously perceived?

Now for the dream: About 8 a.m. in 1907 I was still asleep and was dreaming that I was with Mme. Charcot. (Why Mme. Charcot, to whom I have never spoken and whom I do not know?) We were in a motor-car driving in an avenue of plane-trees. The car was going so fast that I feared an accident: the accident happened and I woke.

The accident was simply that the postman had brought a registered letter, and in taking this letter I fancied (though I have no idea why) that there was some connection between my dream and the letter. To signify this, and by way of memorandum, I made a little cross on the receipt. The letter came from the Azores, and was from my friend, Colonel Chaves, asking for an introduction to Jean Charcot, whom I did not know, who was due to reach the Azores a few weeks later in his yacht.

I think that these three personal cases were not mere coincidences but were due to cryptesthesia; but I think so only because there are many other more evidential cases. In themselves these cases prove nothing, but they reinforce the large number of proofs collected by more favoured observers.1



III. Monitions of Death

Monitions of death often occur. I give a large number of instances because I hope to carry conviction to the mind of the reader by their variety and complexity, and especially by the very great number of the witnesses.

4It has been necessary to abridge greatly the records of monitions and premonitions given above. This is to be regretted, for to appreciate their full force ample details are necessary; the skeleton of facts does not carry the weight of conviction given by circumstantial details. I sincerely hope that those persons who are interested in these perplexing problems will not remain content with these brief summaries, but will refer to the original documents.

Monitions of death do not differ essentially from other monitions, but deserve separate mention because of their frequency. The cases reproduced here might have been much more numerous had I not exercised a somewhat severe criticism. This criticism might have been still more rigid, and I willingly admit that half of the cases cited have not any absolute evidential value; but even allowing for this, there remain a notable number of authentic and indisputable facts that defy sceptical analysis.

If only from a historic point of view, it is interesting to cite the very clear monition received by the eminent chemist, Chevreul.

It was in 1814, a little before the entry of the Allies into Paris. In his room, between the two windows of his study, he saw a pale white stationary form like an elongated cone surmounted by a sphere. Shuddering slightly, he turned away his eyes and ceased to see the phantom. Looking back at the same place, he saw it again; and this he did three times. He then decided to withdraw into his bedroom; and to do this had to pass in front of the phantom, which vanished.

The vision was probably not recognized, but at the same moment at a distance from Paris an old friend of his was dying, who bequeathed his library to him. Chevreul adds, "If I had been superstitious I might have thought the apparition real/'

Chevreul also narrates the story of a well-known anatomist of the eighteenth century, who said to the barber who was attending him, "Why do you grasp my arm?" The barber was amazed at the question. At that very instant one of Chevreul's friends had drowned himself. The scientist was so struck with the occurrence that he never afterwards would enter the room alone.

Brierre de Boismont, in his book on hallucinations, tells the story of a young girl who in a dream saw her dying mother, heard her call, and described the whole scene in the death-chamber. The details were correct, and her mother was dying at the time. He adds, "If we were to cite all the names of persons of sound judgment and extended knowledge, high in the ranks of science, who have had such warnings, they would furnish much matter for thought."

This book has been written for precisely that reason. There is much matter for thought.

