I have nothing to alter in what I then said; unless that this proposition, which then seemed so rash, is now on the point of being universally accepted, it is accepted by Mrs. H. Sidgwick and by Sir Oliver Lodge. Very soon it will seem so simple that no one will think that there was any rashness in putting it forward.

The phenomenon of cryptesthesia is as certain as any other scientific fact; to deny it is to rebel against all scientific demonstration.

All these experiments with Mme. BrifTaut, Mrs. Leonard, and Mrs. Piper seem to give some support to the spiritualistic theory; and I make this avowal against the grain. The lucidity of these seeresses appears to occur only because a spirit seems to intervene to reveal such and such a fact to them. I am careful not to infer that this is so, but everything happens as if the spirit of the deceased intervened to tell the medium his name, his relations, the facts he knows, and to converse with the "guide" of the medium.

This is no doubt only a semblance; the means of cognition remain mysterious. The hypothesis that the facts are communicated to us by a being seemingly human is a very anthropomorphic hypothesis. We may allow it a place, strictly provisionally, and on this delicate matter it is advisable to take the scientific ground here adopted. I consider cryptesthesia absolutely demonstrated, but I reject all hypotheses on the origin of these revelations and divinations, considering the proofs insufficient.

There are many other interesting facts mentioned by Myers,

Bozzano, and others which I do not give here; because they can be explained by forgotten, subconscious, but normal ideas, even when this explanation seems improbable. To warrant the inference of cryptesthesia at all there must be absolute impossibility that the information given should have come through any normal channel. M. Heintzer, for instance, sees the apparition of his father with a white beard and in a dress coat. He knew that his father was dead and had never seen him when his beard was white. While Mr. Heintzer was abroad his father had been buried in a dress coat and during his last illness the beard had turned white. Is it not possible that the son had heard of these circumstances and forgotten them, though he might in perfect good faith deny this?

Flournoy may be right in supposing that the name Burnier1 did not come to his medium by any process of metapsychics or cryptesthesia. Although the explanation by normal means is terribly involved and improbable, it must be admitted to be just possible.

The extraordinary powers of the latent memory are such as to make any illusion possible. Stainton Moses writes automatically, by the dictation of Rector, "Go to the bookcase and take the last book but one on the second shelf, look at the last paragraph on page 94, and you will find this sentence..." A long sentence follows. Stainton Moses gets up, takes the book, and verifies that the quotation is correct and is on p. 94. But it is reasonable to suppose that this may be a very complete and perfect subconscious reminiscence rather than a fact of cryptesthesia. Shortly after, Rector writes, "Pope is the last great writer, etc.,... Take the eleventh volume on the same shelf, open it, and you will find this sentence... " Stainton Moses does as instructed and finds the quotation on p. 145. The thing is very strange: why did the book open at the very page quoted? Was this fortuitous? Chance explains nothing. Could it be that Stainton Moses had previously opened the book in a state of semi-somnambulism?

Mme. R. has given me wonderful instances of cryptesthesia that cannot be explained by telepathy. Mme. R. is a lady forty years of age, a non-professional medium, married, and the mother of a family. She is interested in spiritualism because while very

JSee p. 773 (French edition).

young she says that she had a vision that preserved her from a great danger. (Helen Smith had a similar experience early in life.)

Mme. R.'s communications are usually by automatic writing, sometimes verbal, and (rarely) by raps. I will quote three that are very clearly demonstrative:

1. This concerned one of my dear friends lately deceased, whom she had not known, and whose name I believe I never mentioned before her. She told me that his name was Antoine, that I entered the room a few moments after his death and kissed his forehead; she added that he used to call me Carlos. The name, the detail of the kiss, and the fact that he alone of all my friends called me Carlos are all characteristic.

Antoine, speaking by Mme. R., said that he had been at Fontainebleau with his wife Lucie, saying, "We were sadly happy there." His widow assured me that this fitted the facts. I did not know of the visit to Fontainebleau. The name "Lucie" was not quite wrong, for the lady told me that Antoine used often to say to her, "It is a pity that your name is not Lucie! That is the name I like best!"

2. The next case is still more striking. A near relation of mine, a young man of one-and-twenty, poisoned himself with strychnine. The cause of death was kept secret from everyone, except from his father, his uncle, and myself. It was never mentioned in any newspaper. Three weeks later I asked Mme. R. for the name of a near relation lately deceased; she said, "He was called George; you were at his death-bed, there was a red foam on his lips." This was absolutely true. Then she said, "Lulu, Lulu." In his family he was called "Lolo." I set aside numerous and serious mistakes, but there is one characteristic detail: George, speaking by Mme. R., said, "Stephen, Stephen!1 Oh, that writing! I thought I could never finish it!" This referred to an incident quite unknown to anybody, and was most astonishingly precise. Before killing himself, the unhappy boy had written a long letter to a friend, Etienne, which he had left open on the table. No one but his father, his uncle, and I had seen this letter. Now Mme. R., who lived a retired life, could know nothing of all these facts which we had all three kept strictly secret. I knew nothing of Etienne, George's friend.

xThe name Stephen in English corresponds exactly to the French name Etienne.

3. The third fact, which on thinking it over, appears to me one of the most striking examples of cryptesthesia yet obtained, is the following: I give the details, for it shows astonishing lucidity acting at a distance of 1,200 miles, and exact notes were taken. In June, 1906, at 10.30 p.m., in presence of my friend Octave Houdaille, Mme. S., Mme. R., and her twelve-year-old daughter, after some incoherent phrases, we got the following sentence by raps, more distinct than ever before. (In the whole course of my experiments with Mme. R. the raps were unintelligible only twice or three times.) "Bancalamo"; I could not refrain from saying, "Oh, it is Latin, calamo!" But the dictation continued imperturbably, "Banca la mort guette famille.,, Thence onwards the answers were incoherent. I thought at first that the first word must be in Italian — Bianca=Blanche; but no one present could interpret the words.

The next day, Thursday, at 2 p.m. the news of the assassination of Queen Draga of Serbia was received at Paris. Some Serbian officers, having bought over the palace servants, entered at midnight and assassinated King Alexander, his wife, and her two brothers; her two sisters escaping by a miracle. Not for a moment did I connect this tragedy with the previous evening's seance.

On Friday, reading in the paper some details relative to the crime, I learned that Draga's father was named Panka, and this came as a ray of light.

1. The word Banca is very near Panka. (I will return to this later.)

2. The time at which the message was given, 10.30 p.m., is, to a minute, the time at which the assassins left the Hotel de la Couronne de Serbie; correcting for Belgrade time which is one and one-half hours in advance of Paris time.

3. The words apply with startling exactitude to the peril menacing the whole family of Panka; the words "Death lies in wait family" could hardly be more appositely chosen in view of the situation at midnight in Belgrade.

Now to consider how far the five letters of the word Banca are applicable to Draga's father. Of these five letters, each carrying a probability of 1 to 25, three only are correct. The compounded probability is therefore in round figures 1 to 1500. But analyzing the entire word the probability is much less. That the word should have five letters, neither more nor less, works out to 1 to 7. For a chance name there might have been 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 letters (Jean, Marie, Robert, Etienne, Julienne, Eleonore, Marguerite). The compounded probability is then 1 to 10,500. But more than this, B for P is not totally wrong if the communication were by sound: Germans interchange them and say brophet for "prophet" and petter for "better."

The error in the fourth letter is curious, for in the Serbian alphabet the fourth letter in the name of Draga's father is a single letter pronounced dj or dz, or tz that the French alphabet (which we were using) does not contain and it would seem that C comes nearest to it in sound. Even if we allow that B is quite wrong, we must admit that C is not and the total compounded probability then becomes 1 to 500,000, which is a moral certainty.

Only three hypotheses are possible in subjective metapsychics:

(A) Mal-observation, collusion or illusion; (B) chance; (C) cryptesthesia. In the experience narrated above, collusion or illusion must be ruled out, for the message was given before the event was known. No one in Paris knew at 10 p.m. on the 10th of June that there was a plot against Draga; and of the five persons present, who had no relations at all with any Balkan State, probably none even knew of Draga. The only hypotheses remaining are chance and cryptesthesia.

Chance, however, is inadmissible: for not only was a name given against odds of 1 to 500,000; but the fateful phrase "Mort guette famille" probably applies only to the family of Panka whose three children were in a few minutes to perish; out of the fifty millions of families existing that evening in Europe. Grasset, however, has not hesitated to affirm that chance gave Banca for Panca and that the words "Mort guette famille" might apply to a thousand other families. The objection is really absurd.

In fact, if an intelligent force inspired this sentence — and appearances favour this bold hypothesis — it would seem that this intelligence wished to make a declaration whose authenticity could be verified. If Panka had been some old working baker of Belgrade I could never have ascertained whether the monition were veridical or fanciful. No one can investigate fifty million families, a hundred at most would be the limit.



(b) Investigation with a Hidden Alphabet

Here I would indicate a new method which I devised for verifying cryptesthesia. It succeeded with me because I was experimenting with a medium endowed with the special sensitiveness required; but Sir William Barrett has shown that it may succeed with others. In any case this method with a hidden alphabet has great advantages and deserves trial, though I would not insist upon it, as mediums are best left to act according to their intuitions in choosing the method by which answers are obtainable.1

These experiments were carried out with Gustave Ollendorff, Henri Ferrari, Louis Olivier, Albert Pere, and Gaston Fournier — nearly all deceased, alas, my faithful and beloved comrades! The medium was my deeply regretted friend, Gaston Fournier, then aged thirty-two, a kindly man, clear-sighted and reliable.

The experiments were made in the following manner: G., the medium, placed his hands on the table, every tilt setting in

Fig. io. — Arrangements for experiment with a hidden alphabet. E. D. C. are at the tilting table with their backs to A. and B., who have the alphabet before them. The bell is so fixed as to ring if the table tilts.

motion an electric bell. C. and D. also had their hands on the table but did not influence it.

At three or four yards' distance on another table, and behind a sheet of cardboard, the alphabet was placed so that G., who had his back turned to it, could not see it. A. and B. sit at this table. A. runs over the alphabet with a pencil, B. writes down the letter at which the table tilts, he being made aware ol th:s by the sound of the bell.

1See Ch. Richet, La suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilites, Rev. Philosophique, October, 1883, 609. Des mouvements inconscients (Hotnmage a M. Chevreul), Paris, Alcan, aout 1886 et Revue de I'hypnotisme, 1886, 170 and 209. An excellent analysis has been given in P. S. P. R., 1884, fasc. vii, 239. Relation of diverse experiences, etc., P. S. P. R., June, 1888, 138.

The letters indicated by this method give intelligible sentences; therefore, the tilts being due to unconscious muscular pressure by G., these pressures, indicating the letter required, must be due to lucidity. Everything happens as if G., wanting to send a message, could see the alphabet to which his back is turned and which is hidden by the cardboard sheet. The movement of the pencil over the letters is both silent and irregular, and during these experiments we intentionally talk, sing, recite verses, and in fact make such a noise that B., who writes down the letters, can hardly hear the stroke of the bell.

One day by excess of precaution I used a circular instead of a rectilinear alphabet, and beginning, not at A but with some other letter, and moving the pencil at very different rates, we got Fa zol do. These are not chance letters but indicate intelligence, and therefore cryptesthesia.

All answers that have a meaning at all, even if uninteresting, indicate cryptesthesia, and that of a peculiar kind — the perception by the medium of a hidden letter — such perception being unrelated to normal sight or hearing.

Complete sentences were given, transposed verses, such as

"Tombe aux pieds de ce sexe a qui tu dois ta mere."

Or Latin lines:

"Infandum, regina, jubes renovare dolorem."

Or phrases in old French as when the soi-distant Villon "Ou sont les neiges d'antan? Louys le Cruel. Essai sur daemoniomanie."

The sentences are meaningless in themselves, but show cryptesthesia, for it was quite impossible for Gaston, whose muscles were moving the table, to know the letters pointed to by the pencil which I was moving irregularly and silently over the hidden alphabet.

Sir William Crookes came one day to be present at one of these experiments. He put the mental question, "What is the name of my eldest son?" By the hidden alphabet we had the answer, "I know only the slang." The alphabet was not only hidden as before described, but it was lit by a small lamp that barely allowed us to see the letters. The answer might be to any question, but the point is that the table-tilts corresponded with the movements of the pencil that could not be perceived by Gaston by any normal means.

These experiments also demonstrate the power of the subconscious, for Gaston, like the rest of us, sang, laughed, and talked during the whole of these experiments, some of which were complicated— such as the dictation backwards of a Latin verse. The whole of his conscious personality was in full activity, while the subconscious part was no less active in quite another manner independently of the consciousness.

Is this alphabetical cryptesthesia telepathic? It is possible, there is no evidence one way or the other; but in one case there was certainly no telepathy from those present, though the result calculated according to probabilities was not at all striking. I said to a Mr. D. who was very sceptical, he not being present at the experiment, "Think of some name, either that of an historical person or any unknown name, we will get it by the table and I will tell it you tomorrow." The answer obtained was F.N.T.B.T. If we take each preceding letter, as is quite permissible, we get E M S A S.

The name thought of by Mr. D. was Cesar or Caesar. On five letters with a probability of 1 to 25, two being correct, the compounded probability is 1 to 42; but this is not all, for that the answer should be a word of five letters corresponding to a word of five letters thought of, gives a probability of 1 to 7. The total then becomes 1 to 294; and if the table lagged behind the movement of the pencil, the word comes out as D M S A R, which passably approaches Csesar.

I mention this experiment, which in comparison with the good ones described above, is terribly poor, not to draw any inference from it, but only to show that when the methods of experiment are faultless, the calculus of probabilities is very useful. For my own part I prefer an unexceptionable experiment where the odds against chance success are small, to one against which the odds are very high, but where the experiment itself is vitiated by a slight error which makes the calculus inapplicable.

I will mention one more experiment. Paul, the brother of Gaston, in no way mediumistic and very sceptical, was present at a seance without touching the table. We asked him to think of a name. The name thought of was indicated by C H E V A L. The name thought of was Chevalon. Mile. Chevalon, some time deceased, was a friend of the family to which Gaston and Paul belonged. We then asked the spirit "Chevalon" to give us something characteristic, and by means of the table and the hidden alphabet we got "How is your mother?" On which (it must be acknowledged) Gaston was frightened; and neither that evening nor afterwards would he act as medium. I could never persuade him to try again.

Experiments with a hidden alphabet are, I think, very valuable as giving decisive proofs of cryptesthesia. They have been recently repeated by Sir William Barrett very successfully.1

The mediums, who were personal friends of Sir William, were completely blindfolded by a mask covering the whole face; the letters of the alphabet, placed before them, could not be seen at all by them and moreover these letters were placed at random and covered with a sheet of glass and screened by a table-cloth. Under these conditions coherent messages were received. The actual sense of these is of no importance; it is sufficient to know that the letters indicated by very rapid and vigorous movements of the planchette were not chance combinations but had very distinct meanings.

In one case, very carefully observed by Sir William, the mediums, Mrs. Travers-Smith and Mr. Lennox Robinson, were blindfolded and the letters of the alphabet were placed (anyhow), under a sheet of glass. One evening a few hours after the torpedoing of the Lusitania, it was indicated by this means that Sir Hugh Lane, a friend of the two mediums, had been drowned. While the seance was in progress and after this announcement had been made, one of the evening papers gave the name of Sir Hugh Lane as one of the victims.

This case cannot be held to carry much weight, as the mediums knew that the Lusitania had been torpedoed and that Sir Hugh Lane had left America some days before. It would have been easy for subconsciousness to conclude that he might be one of those drowned. The full account of this experience is given by Mrs. Hester Travers-Smith (Voices from the Void, London, Rider & Co., 1919, 35).

A better experience, analogous to the above, is also reported by Mrs. Travers-Smith. One evening after a fruitless seance, there came through the table, "Ship sinking, all hands lost, William East overboard. Women and children weeping and wailing; sorrow, sorrow, sorrow!" At that moment a newsboy in the street cried the news. Mrs. Smith went to get the paper which

lAccount by Miss Dallas. Experiences avec VOui-ja, les mediums operant les yeux bandes (A. S. P., March, 191 6, xxvi, 45).

contained the shipwreck of the Titanic. "William East" might well stand for William Stead.

Although the case of Sir Hugh Lane does not prove the monition, it stands as evidence for the production of messages by a hidden alphabet, and therefore is a good case of cryptesthesia. Mrs. Travers-Smith has given several other decisive proofs.

A professor of the University of Groningen, Mr. Heymans, undertook some experiments in a manner different from that described above which gave very interesting results. His medium was a non-professional, a student. He has not as yet published anything, but he wrote me the letter given below: "Our experiments in telepathy were carried out in two rooms at my laboratory, one over the other. The blindfolded subject was placed in the lower room behind a screen enclosing him on three sides, and with an opening in front through which his hand could pass. This hand can move over a board divided like a chess-board into forty-two squares. In the ceiling of this room, made of reinforced concrete, there is an opening about thirteen inches by twenty-one inches, closed top and bottom by sheets of glass. Looking through this window one of us in the upper room can see the board and the hand of the subject, and he tries mentally to direct the hand to a given square determined by lot. The upper room being kept dark, the subject can see nothing even if he were not blindfolded. No sound can penetrate the ceiling; even by shouting one cannot make oneself understood. Nevertheless the correct square (probability 1:48) was indicated 32 times in 80 trials. The mathematical probability of 32 successes on 80 trials is (TV)21"

There may be telepathy in this case, but there certainly is cryptesthesia, for there are two factors involved, (1) the carrying out of the agent's thought by telepathy, which is one of the modalities of cryptesthesia; and (2) after the square has been thought of, the movement to that square; which can only be cryptesthesia.

The care with which this eminent psychologist has made these experiments renders them very valuable.

It would be very interesting to resume experiments (using the hidden alphabet) with powerful mediums, who might doubtless be trained to correspond in this manner. In any case it is obvious that cryptesthesia admits of great varieties in experimentation and conceals unforeseen possibilities.



(c) Cross-Correspondences

This is an ingenious proceeding to verify lucidity. It has been much used of late in England and America.

The principle is as follows: Two persons, A. and P., agree to write each other letters simultaneously to see if their thoughts coincide. The letters are dated and carry the post-mark. The experiment is unexceptionable, especially if the thought of the agent, A., is determined by chance. But even if this is not so chosen it is highly unlikely that two persons acting in good faith should hit upon the same idea.

Miss Ramsden and Miss Miles have had some results worthy of note.1 Miss Miles was in London, and Miss Ramsden at Bulstrode, eighteen miles distant. Miss M. was the agent, and Miss R. the percipient.

October 27th, Miss M., spectacles; Miss R., spectacles.

October 30th, Miss M., a watch; Miss R., a medal on a chain.

October 31st, Miss M., while combing her hair, sees the sunset on the Brompton Oratory, with the cross standing out against the sky. She desires to transmit this. Miss R. thinks that Miss M. has wished to transmit a crucifixion; she is surprised to see only the cross without the holy women at its foot.

November 4th, Miss Ramsden describes: Gothic arches like a cloister; long-necked herons and water-birds; a row of guns fired; a woman with a shepherd's plaid; a long-haired dog, a greyhound, and a fine retriever.

November 4th, Miss Miles went to the church at Malmesbury where there were Gothic arches resembling a cloister. There was some talk of rabbit-shooting; swans and a heron were seen; there were greyhounds and retrievers. Mrs. de Beaufort, a friend of Miss Miles, was wearing a shepherd's plaid.

Other proofs of cryptesthesia have been given by cross-correspondence. I quote only one, given by Miss Johnson, who is a research officer of the S. P. R. (Survival of Man, Sir Oliver Lodge, p. 226). "Mrs. Forbes's script, purporting to come from her son Talbot, stated that he must now leave her, since he was looking for a sensitive who wrote automatically, in order that he might obtain corroboration of her own writing. Mrs. Verrall on the same day wrote of a fir-tree planted in a garden, and the script was signed with a sword and suspended bugle. The

XP. 5. P. R., October, 1907.

latter was part of the badge of the regiment to which Talbot Forbes had belonged, and Mrs. Forbes had in her garden some fir-trees grown from seed sent to her by her son. These facts were unknown to Mrs. Verrall. In another case (Proc. S. P. R.t xviii, 269-271), on October 16, 1904, Mrs. Verrall's script gave details, afterwards verified, of what Mrs. Forbes was doing; and immediately afterwards Mrs. Verrall had a mental impression of Mrs. Forbes sitting in her drawing-room, with the figure of her son standing looking at her. Mrs. Forbes's script of the same day, purporting to come from her son, stated that he was present and wished she could see him, and that a test was being given for her at Cambridge."

The laborious studies by Mr. Hubert Wales must be considered under this head.1 He received notes sent to him almost daily from Miss Samuel, and he himself took daily notes at Hindhead (about forty miles from London). The intention was to see if there were correspondence in these notes relative to Mr. Wales's thoughts and occupations. The method is excellent; but the results do not seem very demonstrative of cryptesthesia. Mr. Wales classed the notes in three groups:

(1) Veridical, hardly attributable to coincidence, 16; (2) Partially and confusedly veridical, 200; (3) No connection, 159.

The whole observations, 375, extended over eight months. It is not easy to draw a definite inference, even on the 16 cases considered veridical; they are about 4 per cent, of the whole. But there were some very encouraging results, especially of apparent premonitory impressions.

The study of cross-correspondences has been pushed very far. With inexhaustible patience, Mrs. Verrall, Miss Helen Verrall, Mrs. Holland, Miss Alice Johnson, Mr. Piddington, Dr. Verrall, and Mrs. Sidgwick have elaborated a long and remarkable series that could be brought to a satisfactory conclusion only by persons who, like Mrs. Verrall, unite scientific insight with a profound knowledge of classical literature and exceptional powers of mediumship. Any analysis of them, however, would be lengthy and if not minute would be unenlightening.

The personality of Myers certainly seems traceable in some words of Mrs. Piper's, and also in some writings of Mrs. Verrall's.

M Report on a series of cases of apparent thought transference without

conscious agency, P. S. P. R., 1920, xxxi, 218-924.

Mrs. Piper knows neither Latin nor Greek, nevertheless she makes quotations and allusions that are so numerous, so skilful, and so complex that no trickery so perverse can be supposed. It has thence been inferred that it was Myers, then recently deceased and during his lifetime well versed in classical literature, who was the inspirer of these writings. Numerous attempts were made to establish a relation between the writings of Mrs. Verrall (V. Myers) and the speeches of Mrs. Piper (P. Myers). Coincidence in these would not have been a proof of personal survival, but might have been a beginning of such proof (S. P. R. Proc, 1910-1914). It is not possible here to enter into further detail. It will suffice to cite the diametrically opposite conclusions arrived at by J. Maxwell and Mrs. Sidgwick.1

Maxwell thinks that exaggerated weight has been given to symbolism and that the interpretations of that symbolism are sometimes fanciful, sometimes wire-drawn. He is inclined to think that placing so much confidence in automatic scripts and seeking to find in them far-fetched and complicated symbolism would end in finding transcendental relations everywhere.

He therefore declines to admit the inferences drawn by Mrs. Verrall and Mr. Piddington. "It is impossible," he says, "to admit the intervention of a spirit. We want proof of facts; and the system of cross-correspondences is founded on negative facts and is an unstable foundation. Only positive facts have an intrinsic value, which cross-correspondences cannot show; not at present, at any rate."

Mrs. Sidgwick differs from Mr. Maxwell.2 According to her the probability of personal survival is strengthened by the general character of the communications which show in both ideas and wording more similarity to the ideas of the supposed communicators than with those of the mediums. This argument of Mrs. Sidgwick's is not very strong, for the subtlety of the subconscious in mediums is sufficient to reconstitute the personality of Myers or of any other person in a most striking manner. Mrs. Sidgwick adds, with very good reason, that more positive proofs are required.

\J. Maxwell, Les correspondences croisees et la methode expkrimentale, P. S. P. R., part lxv, 1912, 54-144.

M reply to Dr. Joseph Maxwell's Paper on cross-correspondences and the experimental method, P. S. P. R., July, 19 13, part lxvii, 375-40 1.

Mr. Gerald Balfour1 concludes that this long and laborious investigation leads slowly but surely towards the inference that many facts appearing in this cross-correspondence can be satisfactorily explained only by the spiritist hypothesis.

Mr. Balfour states his conclusions on these long automatic scripts simultaneously received, to the following effect: "All three mediums mention Euripides; they all indicate more or less clearly that Euripides is the subject of the cross-correspondences. Two of them connect Euripides with the Hercules Furens!'

In another case which Mr. Balfour considers good, Mrs. Piper says: Light in the West, and Mrs. Verrall says, "The words are from Maud (Tennyson), 'Rosy is the East.'" The true quotation is "Rosy is the West" {Maud, xvii).

These are certainly well-marked cases of cryptesthesia; but whether there is cryptesthesia, or lucidity, or telepathy, these do not in any way imply survival of a conscious personality.

On the other hand Mr. Hereward Carrington concludes (and I quote his words as agreeing with my own conclusions) the total facts "are all fully explicable upon purely psychological and naturalistic lines. They almost invariably resolve themselves into simple subconscious memory associations. Chance has played a larger part than is allowed for. All these communications, despite the great labour that they represent, carry less proof of survival than the seances of Mrs. Piper speaking as George Pelham" {A. S. P., 1909, xix, 294). It seems that this judgment of Mr. Carrington's is justified: but we agree writh him in recognizing that many of the phenomena of cross-correspondence abundantly establish telepathy and cryptesthesia, even if they do not prove survival.



5. Cryptesthesia Among Sensitives

If we define as "spiritist" those phenomena in which an extraneous personality seems to intervene (maintaining all reserve as to the reality of such personality), we see that cryptesthesia appears with increasing intensity (l).in normal persons, (2) in hypnotized subjects, and (3) in mediums.

But there are some of its manifestations in persons that cannot be referred to any of these three classes. We will call these persons sensitives. As the facts defy classification, such distinc-

xSome recent scripts affording evidence of personal survival, P. S. P. R., 1914, xxvii, 221-243.

tions must be arbitrary; for mediums, even when not in trance, are sensitives; hypnotizable persons, even when not hypnotized, very often are sensitives; and certain persons who are not hypnotizable and are not mediums, show powers of cryptesthesia sufficient to prevent their being classed as normal. They, too, are sensitives.

Moreover, the passage from the normal state to a state of trance, and from the hypnotic to the waking state is always gradual, often undefinable, and all transitional states are gone through. Nothing is more artificial than to make sharp divisions between the normal state, the hypnotic, mediumistic trance, and a state of sensitiveness. These distinctions are only conveniences for study. In order that experimental lucidity may be exercised, certain exterior aids are sometimes necessary — psychometry and crystal vision.



(a) Psychometry, or Pragmatic Cryptesthesia

The term "psychometry" (soul-measurement) is so detestable that we cannot retain it in scientific language. It was invented by Buchanan.1

Buchanan's "psychometry" is really nothing more than a method of developing cryptesthesia, and we shall therefore call it pragmatic cryptesthesia (i.e., cryptesthesia by means of material objects).

Pragmatic cryptesthesia must be understood in a different sense than that understood by Buchanan at its inception. That inception was very strange. Elizabeth Denton (Mrs. Buchanan) on seeing and touching some fragment from a geologic stratum, reconstructed a Silurian or Jurassic landscape! Only a simpleton would take this at face-value: it is nothing but the result of brilliant imagination on the part of the wife of an expert geologist, and all these accounts by E. Denton have only a literary interest.

1On this, see Buchanan, Manual of Psychometry, Boston. W. Denton and Elizabeth Denton, Nature's Secret or psychometric research, London, Houlston Wright, 1863. W. Denton, The Soul of Things. L. Deinhard, Psychometrie, Sphinx, x. Jos. Peter, Psychometrie {Die U ebersinnliche) Welt, trad, in A. S. P., 1910, xx, 231-240, 276-280. Thaneg (pseudonyme de DescormiersV Mkthode de clairvoyance psychomitrique, Libr. des Sc. Psych., Paris, 1902. James Coates, Seeing the invisible: Practical studies in psychometry, thought transference, telepathy, and allied phenomena, London and New York, Fowler & Wells, 1909, 8vo. Edmond Duchatel, Enquete sur des cas de psychometrie. La vue a distance dans le temps et dans Vespace (preface by J. Maxwell), Paris, Leyraarie, 1910, 8vo.

Since then psychometry has been much extended. On any object being given to a sensitive, many curious details are furnished concerning the persons to whom it belonged; and under these conditions fine examples of lucidity are observable. The magnetizers of 1820 to 1850 experimented in this manner, and their superiority to Buchanan lies in the fact that they did not use the word "psychometry/'

Despite the lucidity so often observed it is not proved that the presence of the object is indispensable. Just as it is not at all certain that the so-called transmission of thought is anything but cognizance of a real fact, knoum because it is real, so also it is not certain that contact with a given object is necessary to the metapsychic cognizance of that object. Cryptesthesia (the reality of which cannot be denied), is almost as readily exercised without material contact, as with it.

Nevertheless it is possible that things, despite their apparent inertia, may emit some (unknown) vibrations that arouse cryptesthesia (though to imagine such is scarcely a presentable hypothesis), and we are reduced to somewhat pitiful conjectures as to what the forces that awaken the faculty can possibly be.

"The seas are still disturbed by the track of Pompey's vessels." Certainly, but how many others have disturbed them! Whenever we speak of cryptesthesia we can only speak of the fact itself. It is a fact, but we can define neither its modalities, its conditions, nor its limits.

"Clairvoyance," says Delanne, "is a faculty that certainly exists, but to seek to explain everything by it is to transgress logic and scientific method," and he adds, "It obeys laws and is manifested under determinate conditions."

That is so, but we are entirely ignorant what these laws may be. They are not, alas! determined as yet — whatever M. Delanne may claim. We know that some persons are more endowed in this respect than others, and perhaps the faculty to some minute extent is not entirely lacking in anyone. We know that some subjects are slightly sensitive, and others very much more so. We know that cryptesthesia is developed by hypnotism, that mediums in spiritist seances show it much more strongly still, and that with powerful mediums it becomes wonderfully intense; but that is about all that we do know.

How did Gallet foresee the number of votes that Casimir-Perier would obtain four hours later? How did Thoulet read the telegram that would be sent to his friend two days later? It is just as hard to understand, neither more nor less obscure as how Mrs. Piper could know so well everything relating to George Pelham. When we speak of lucidity, clairvoyance, premonition, and cryptesthesia we are dealing with a faculty that is quite unknown to us, and we can only see its results; its conditions escape us entirely.

Mrs. Green, in London, sees two girls drowning in Australia, and their hats floating on the water. Mrs. R., in Paris, alludes to the deaths of Panca's children — the family that the Serbian officers are just about to assassinate in Belgrade. We can formulate no sort of explanation, and similarly we do not see what possible mechanism can awaken cryptesthetic sensitiveness. Appearances point very strongly to the inference that mediums in some trance conditions are inspired by a guide temporarily incarnate in them (I use the language of spiritualism without implying the least concurrence in its doctrines), and phenomena of cryptesthesia sometimes become extremely marked.

With reference to psychometry it is impossible to state accurately what part the object held by the sensitive plays in the result or in the sensation produced in her. Mrs. Thompson, in the experiment given ante, taking my son's watch into her hands, says, "Three generations mixed," but this in no way proves that this cognizance of the past is due to vibrations stored up in the watch. Mr. Dufay has described how Maria B. in hypnotic trance, on being given an object that had belonged to a murderer, described the murder. But was the object indispensable?

Miss X. related to the P. R. (General Meeting, May, 1895, /. 5\ P. R., v, 247), that some papers were shown her that seemed of no special significance, but that she felt an intense reaction of blood and horror. The papers had been taken on the battlefield of Sedan. Mrs. Piper on many occasions after handling locks of hair or other objects has given precise particulars of the persons to whom they belonged.

I now select from among many others an excellent example of pragmatic cryptesthesia given by Mrs. Piper to Sir Oliver Lodge. "A chain was handed to Thinuit' by me, the package having been delivered by hand to me the previous evening. I had just opened the package, glanced at the contents, and hastily read a letter inside, then wrapped it all up again. The chain had been sent by Mrs. John Watson from Sefton Drive.,,

Mrs. Piper said, "This belongs to an old gentleman passed out of the body — a nice old man. I see something the matter with the heart.... Give me the wrappers, all of them."

The papers (wrappers) were given her, the letter among them. Medium held them to the top of her head, gradually flicking away the blank ones. She did not inspect them. "Is there J. N. W. here? Poole. Then there's Sefton, s-e-f-t-o-n, Pool, hair. Yours truly, J. N. W. That's it, 'I send you some hair.' Poole J. N. W. Do you understand that?" Sir Oliver says, "I found afterwards that the letter... contained the words 'Sefton Drive/ and 'Cook' so written as to look like Poole. It also said, 'I send you some hair* and finished 'yours sincerely J. B. W./ the B. being not unlike an N." (quoted verbatim from The Survival of Man, p. 178).

E. Bozzano has studied the possible part of psychometry in the experiments with Mrs. Piper1 and he thinks, with good reason as it seems to me, that neither telepathy nor cryptesthesia accounts for everything in those experiments. He concludes that the spiritualist theory alone covers all the facts. But why go so far? Would it not be wiser to say with me that an unusual faculty of cognition exists? It is incautious to go beyond that by referring to its cause and mechanism.

A commission of enquiry of the Society of Psychic Sciences (of Paris), examined four psychometrists, of whom M. Phaneg2 was one; the report drawn up by M. Warcollier states that the results were poor.

I am not aware of any systematic studies on individuals who are neither mediums nor hypnotizable.

The handling of objects in this manner has been commonly practised by all professed somnambulists, and appears to be one of the conditions of their lucidity. The whole question is to know, what purpose is served by the thing handled and on this we know nothing at all. It is not absurd to suppose that the object emits vibrations that can put the faculty in motion. This special form of cryptesthesia is possibly connected with another singular property of some bodies to emit vibrations which affect the nervous system and produce strong reactions without any known chemical or physical cause. It cannot be denied that some apparently inert

xTiUpathie et psychomitrie en rapport avec la mkdiwmnitk de Mrs. Piper, A. S. P., November, 191 1, xxi, January, 191 2, xxii, 9-15.

2Enqu2te sur la Psychomitrie, A. S. P., 191 1, xxi, 203-210.

substances are capable of moving some human sensibilities. The fact of the divining-rod establishes that. It will be seen later that it is now demonstrated that there is a rhabdic force that acts indirectly by provoking subconscious muscular contractions and causes the bending of the rod. It can be explained only by the radiation of some unknown power — a rhabdic force. Since this power exists it is reasonable to suppose that its manifestation may not be confined to acting upon "dowsers" with the rod actually in hand.

The influence of chemical and other bodies has often been studied ever since Reichenbach and the metallo-therapists; but we will set aside those experiments to account for which electric or magnetic forces may be alleged.

Drs. Bourru and Burot have studied the action of chemical substances enclosed in well-stoppered flasks; but in spite of the care with which these distinguished physicians have conducted their experiments, it does not appear certain that the very distinct effects produced may not have been due to verbal suggestion and expectant attention.1

Messrs. Bourru and Burot experimented with hypnotizable subjects showing all the phenomena of the major hypnotism. Such subjects are extremely amenable to suggestion. If a hermetically sealed tube of laudanum is placed in their hands with the injunction "Attend now" they will show strong physiological reactions, without, however, justifying the hypothesis that vibrations from the drug have traversed the glass. The hypothesis of suggestion can be eliminated only by proving that the effects are specific, such as sleep from morphia, vomiting from an emetic, convulsions from strychnine, intoxication from alcohol; then, when the physiological effects are so sharply defined, the experimenter, if himself ignorant at the time of the experiment of the contents of the tubes, may refer the action to the drug.

This diagnosis, necessary to the inference of specific action apart from all verbal suggestion, has not been made with sufficient precision. In a few cases I have tried this experiment with vague semblances of success, but am unable to draw any conclusions. In fine, Bourru and Burot have observed some very

xLa suggestion mentale et I'action a distance des substances toxiques et mHicamenteuses, i vol., izmo, Paris, J. B. Bailliere, 1887. See also Revue philosophique, March, 1886. E. Alliot, same subject, Paris, J. B. Bailliere, 1886.

strong and singular physiological effects, but these are possibly to be explained by suggestion.

M. Wasielewski tried the same on Mile, de B., and the experiments were quite successful when odoriferous substances like peppermint and brandy were used; so that I am quite satisfied that the success was due to hyperesthesia of the sense of smell. Whatever care be taken in closing a bottle with cork it is impossible that there should be no trace of scent perceptible to a super-acute sense. With four inodorous substances — quinine, distilled water, citric acid, and saccharin — the two former gave failures, the two latter successes (A. S. P., July, 1914, xxiv, 193).

Miss Edith Hawthorne has reported a good case of pragmatic cryptesthesia. Mr. Samuel Jones sent her a fossil found by a miner in a coal-pit. The father of this miner had been killed in a mining accident. Miss Hawthorne says she had a horrible vision of a dead man prone on the ground with blood issuing from his mouth and nose. Other interesting, but vague, indications were given on the numerous objects sent by Mr. Jones.

M. Pagenstecher (of Mexico) undertook some researches on Mrs. Z. that seemed to him to indicate hyperesthesia so strong as nearly to be cryptesthesia.1 But before pronouncing definitely, further details must be awaited. The case seems to be confirmatory of cryptesthesia under hypnotism.

These sundry results are not very satisfactory, though they may well induce those who have good hypnotic subjects or mediums at their disposal to make further experiments. The matter is not exactly metapsychic, but it is possible that the action of substances at a distance may throw some light on the metapsychic phenomenon of cryptesthesia. The action of metals, magnets, and toxic substances exerted at a distance seems well worthy of re-examinations.2

Is it necessary to mention under pragmatic cryptesthesia the superstitions on amulets, mascots, and the like which savages and even some civilized men regard as protective? The old

%A Notable Psychometric Test, Am. S. P. R., 1920, xiv, 386-418.

2Loc. cit., p. 240. — On the origin of metallo-therapy and on the action of metals from a distance which do not belong to metapsychic science, see V. Burco. Etude experimental sur la metallotherapic et la metalloscopie, Rapports faits a la Societe de Biologie, 1877-1878, 8vo, Paris, 1876. J. Moricourt, Manuel de metallothirapie et de mitalloscopie, appliquees an traitement des maladies nerveuses, etc., i2mo, Paris, 1888. Dumontpallier, Metalloscopie et metallotherapic Union medicate, Paris, 1879, xxviii, 333, 381, 421, 457, 473, 567.

magnetizers believed firmly that water and other things might be magnetized to give peculiar virtues; but they did not eliminate suggestion. I can quote a personal experience which is a very good instance. One of my pupils, Dr. Mar... a very trustworthy young man, simple-minded, honest, and very sensitive in his feelings, some weeks after taking his degree came to me saying that he was haunted by ideas of suicide that gave him great distress. He said, with tears in his eyes, "I am sure I shall end by suicide; can you not save me?" There was no reason of love, money, or health that would justify these gloomy anticipations. A happy idea struck me: I had on my table a little bronze figure of the Knight of Death, with the raised visor showing the face of the skull. I said, "Take this statuette, it has magic powers and will protect you." He thanked me effusively and came to see me six months later completely cured, happy and smiling and quite free from suicidal thoughts. He died a natural death some years later.

Was this coincidence? Is it not rather suggestion? In any case I am not so childish as to impute some actual influence to the Knight of Death. It seems to me that amulets, mascots, bits of coral, etc., act by suggestion alone. But suggestion is not to be neglected, and, after all, who knows? It is well to be as cautious in our denials as in our affirmations.

If there were even a shadow of proof of the efficacy of charms and casting of lots, these would be connected with influences proceeding from things. Of all popular superstitions these are the most universal; there are still many countries in which sorcerers and witches, maleficent objects, unlucky stones, the evil eye, and other trash are believed in. If, however, inert objects are inert only in seeming it is possible that some may be favourable and some the reverse; but in this domain there is nothing, up to the present, worthy of attention, and we must leave belief in black masses and wax figures for wizardry to the contemporaries of Catherine de Medici and Mme. de Montespan. The witty and erudite writings of A. de Rochas on charms may be consulted in his book, De I Exterior sation de la sensibilite.

But, I repeat, even in dealing with absurd superstitions, it is well to be cautious in our negations. If we admit (as seems proved), that there is sometimes an emanation from things that acts on the faculty of cryptesthesia, it is not absurd to think that there may be some vibration proceeding from them that may act on our own mentality or that of others. Events are so closely linked that anything is possible.

But we must not give ourselves up to such dreams; even if we admit possible connection between such and such an object and such and such an event, we are absolutely ignorant what that connection may be, and the mystery remains as inaccessible as if there were no connection.

Cryptesthesia in sensitives is helped by external conditions. Professional somnambulists, who are occasionally lucid, for if they did not now and then show real lucidity, they could not succeed in their curious trade, frequently make use of cards to fix their lucidity. It would be madness to fancy any relation other than chance coincidence between the card and the fact; but it is not insane to suppose that "laying the cards" is a preparation for lucidity. A well-known fortune-teller admitted as much to Dr. Osty.

Cheiromancy is a little nearer to sane physiology, for no one denies that hands are quite different in different persons, and that hands, like faces, betray something of the psycho-physiological constitution, vaguely indeed but quite certainly. It is a long step from past to future events; the hand of a duchess may easily be distinguished from that of a cook, but that is very commonplace. Nevertheless palmists claim to read the lines of the hand.1 If there are sometimes remarkable forecasts, these must be put down to chance, or to lucidity stimulated by an external fact; the external fact in this case being the scrutiny of the hand by a sensitive.

Graphology resembles cheiromancy in some respects; but it has an unassailable physiological basis that has nothing to do with metapsychics. Our gestures, and therefore our handwritings,

Woyez Desbarolles, Les mysteres de la main, Paris. Gamier d'Arpentigny, La science de la main, Paris, 1857. E. Magnin, Journal du magnitisme et du Psychisme experimental, December, 191 1. I will cite also a book which is curious if only for its title: Hoping, Institutiones chiromanticae, oder Kurtze Unterweissung Wie man aus denen Linien Bergen, und N'dgeln deren Hande, auch das Jahr, Monat, Wochen und Tage in welchen einem was Gliick oder ungliickliches bevorsteht, muthmaslich judiciren kann, sampt einer gantz neun und ausfiihrlichen Harmonia oder Uebereinstimmung aller Linien auch ausfiihrlichen Abmessung der Saturninae, des Berges Lunae, und anderer Berge, mit Fleiss verfestiget, 3d edit., 8vo, Iena, 1681. See especially N. Vaschide, La psychologie de la main, Paris, 1909. Cheiro's Language of the hand: Complete practical work on cheirognomony and cheiromancy containing the system, rules, and experience of Cheiro (Comte de Hamond), New York, Tennyson; London, Nichols & Co., 1897, xv, 162 pages, with 32 plates.

correspond to feelings and characters. A drunken man will show his intoxication by his writing, and it will be different again according as he is excited or quiet. A very stupid person must inevitably show some trace of stupidity. Dull and intelligent persons cannot have the same handwriting: Quid mens ima ferat scripto tua dextra notabit. But all this has nothing to do with metapsychics, and if sensitives such as Mme. Freya use graphology, that is doubtless to aid their lucidity. A letter sent to a graphologist will show him many psychological traits of the writer, if he has studied a great many handwritings, but lucidity does not come into the matter.1

To cover the whole ground astrology should be mentioned. It was in great honour in former times, but has no serious meaning although some enigmatical journals (Nouveaux Horizons) still advance obscure arguments in its defence.

We are, when all is said, still entirely ignorant what are the conditions that determine cryptesthesia. We cannot even say anything that would be a beginning of scientific treatment, e.g., that external objects have some motive power to produce a cryptic sensation which by association of ideas awakens remembrances, just as a scent may recall memory of the person who used it. We must resign ourselves to ignorance of the means whereby the faculty of cryptesthesia is stimulated to action.



(b) Transfer of Sensibility

There are cases in which tactile sensibility, greatly enhanced, seems to play a part.

A physician of Lyons, Petetin2 (1774-1808), more than a century ago observed the phenomenon of transposition of the senses (the phrase is used here without implying any hypothesis).

'On graphology see Crepieux-Jamin's L'Eriture et le caractere. There is in France a good journal on graphology, issued by a society which has the good sense not to mix up metapsychics with this fragment of normal psychophysiology. My experiment with H. Ferrari and J. Hericourt {Revue philosophique, 1886) has remained classical. With two hypnotizable persons both entirely ignorant of graphology, we obtained complete transformation of the handwriting and its adaptation to that of the new personality created by hypnotic suggestion.

2Pet6tin, pere, Electricite animate. Catalepsie hystSrique ancestrale, Dicouverte du transport des sens, dans Vkpigastre a Vextrfmite* des doigts et des orteils. — Rapports du fiuide nerveux, principe de ce phknomene, avec le fiuide ilectrique. Experiences qui les confirtnent (Lyons, 1808).

He verified facts of hyperesthesia, or rather of cryptesthesia, in serious cases of hysteria, and gives full details in the curious phraseology of his day. The observations seem to have been taken with precision.

The supposed auditory anesthesia must be put aside, for the deafness was only apparent; the patients heard nothing when spoken to at their ears but heard whispers at their finger-tips or at the pit of the stomach. This insensibility to words at the ear is one of those negative hallucinations that have been verified by modern investigations on somnambulists.

It is not the same with regard to visual sensibility; the transposition of the sense is obvious. Petetin thus expresses himself (p. 44). His patient was a Mine. A., aged nineteen, in a cataleptic, i.e., in a somnambulic state:

"I slid under the bedclothes a card that I kept covered by my hand and placed it on her stomach.... Her expression changed, showing attention, surprise, and pain. 'What illness has come to me? I see the queen of spades.' I withdrew the card and showed it to the spectators; they turned pale on seeing *he queen of spades. I placed a second card with the same precautions. The ten of hearts,' she said. A third card was met with 'Hail to the king of clubs.' I was quite upset and hardly remarked the consternation on all the faces round me."

Like the hysteric of Tamboff, the hysteric of Lyons distinguished by her fingers the taste of a cake, apricots, roast mutton, bread-and-milk, and boiled beef. But were all the conditions fully noted?

On the other hand, Mme. A. seems to have shown phenomena of cryptesthesia and premonition that transference of sensibility does not account for. She recognized objects in closed boxes. "If a thought were unexpressed in words, she knew it forthwith and proceeded to act as had been intended she should."

On another hystero-cataleptic patient, Mme. de Saint P., aged twenty-four, the results were less decisive; and, moreover, Petetin did not take the precautions that we now know to be necessary. There were some interesting phenomena, but they are not reported with sufficient accuracy.

The first observation is remarkable, the phenomena being strikingly identical with the TambofT case; but we are now less easy to satisfy on the metapsychic nature of phenomena than they were in 1830.

Perhaps Mile. Pigeaire, a very lucid somnambulist, had sensitiveness of this kind. She read a sealed letter placed on her forehead.

Experimenting with the Misses L., on mental suggestion from the one sister to the other, Sir Oliver Lodge remarked that the phenomena (reproduction of a drawing) were much more distinct when contact was maintained, even when the fifth fingers were barely touching, than when contact was broken.

Boirac1 has given a notable case of reading by tactile hyperesthesia. Mme. V., a somnambule, had her eyes well bandaged and in addition paper was gummed over her eyes. She read small print without hesitation, and told the time from a watch wrapped in a handkerchief. This was reported by Dr. D. G. to Boirac, who determined to experiment with another subject supervised by himself. This subject, Ludovic S., succeeded in reading with his finger-ends as if there were exteriorization of sensation. One reading was given in complete darkness, all light being excluded from the room, Ludovic's eyes being bandaged as well. "It seemed to me impossible to doubt," says Boirac, "that this phenomenon must be referred to touch alone, sight having nothing to do with it."

E. Boirac made another experiment with still stranger results. He seated Ludovic near him but with his back turned and his eyes bandaged, and himself sitting close by, he asked Ludovic to hold his elbow. Then Boirac, passing his finger-tips along the lines of a newspaper, Ludovic read the words. The result was the same when Boirac closed his eyes and could no longer see the words that were under his fingers.

Further research should be made on this tactile hyperesthesia which might permit of the conclusion that the sense of touch sometimes becomes so acute as almost to become cryptesthesia.

We cannot here take into consideration the surprising researches, as yet incomplete, by Louis Farigoule. La vision extraretinienne et le sens paroptique {Nouvelle Revue francaise, 1920, 104).

Very notable cases of cryptesthesia, possibly explicable by extraordinary acuity of sight and touch, have been noticed by

1E. Boirac, La psychologie inconnue, Paris, Mean, 1908, p. 245. Un cas d'apparente transposition des sens.

Dr. A. N. C. Chowrin, director of the lunatic asylum at Tamboff.1

The subject was a woman of thirty-two, cultivated and intelligent, unmarried and suffering from hystero-epilepsy. Dr. Chowrin was led to examine into her case because one day having received a letter in his presence she kept turning it over in her hands without opening it, and began to weep, saying that there was bad news in it. The letter announced the death of a niece.

Several ingenious experiments were then devised. Dr. Chowrin, fully acquainted with the tricks of hysterical patients, took strict precautions, assisted by his colleagues of the Medical Society of Tamboff. Sealed letters written in characters so small as to need a lens, and covered with aniline black, sometimes enclosed in photographically sensitized paper, were read about forty times, and Dr. Chowrin adds, "If M. can open these letters and reseal them so as to leave no external trace on the envelopes and the unexposed sensitive paper, that is as extraordinary as being able to read unopened letters."

In another set of experiments the same subject, M., read hermetically sealed letters in the presence of several persons. Sometimes the contents of the letter were given textually, sometimes by figures of speech giving the sense. For instance, in a letter written by Dr. Andreoff, the words actually written were, "In the sands of Arabia stand three palm-trees between which there flowed a murmuring stream." M. said, "An open space; it is sand, white like snow but it is not snow; three tall trees; I never saw any like them; few leaves but large ones, and a spring of water whose murmur I hear distinctly,"

In another experiment, Dr. Troitzki wrote on a piece of paper, "Sophie Alexandrovna is in bed and looks at the wall," and folded it sixteen times. That day Sophie Alexandrovna (Mme. M.) was in bed with a toothache. She took the paper, held it in one hand, and said, "I see a bed, it is I who am in bed, with a bandage on my chin," and she looked fixedly at the wall. Troitzki and Speranski,both present, never lost sight of the paper for a moment.

Other facts were very significant; Mme. M. could distinguish colours by touch. Before the Medical Society of Tamboff she

^These were published in Russian, in 1898. I know them only in the German translation by A. de Schrenck-Notzing, Experimentelle Untersuch-

ungen auf dem Gebiete des raiimlichen Hellsehens, der Kryptoscopie und inadaequaten Sinneserregung, E. Reinhardt, Munchen, 1919, 80.

was able to tell the colours of thirty flasks, all different, wrapped in paper and placed under a thick cloth. She could taste by the sense of touch. Small pieces of paper were soaked in solutions of soda, common salt, hydrochloride of quinine, sulphate of zinc, placed under her armpit, and she at once perceived the salt, acid, astringent, or bitter taste. As the experimenters did not know which solution was used, all mental transmission and experimental error are eliminated.

The experiments of Gilbert Murray on telepathy which seem wonderful, but are only apparently so, must be explained by extreme auditory hyperesthesia.1

Mr. Murray left the sitting-room and went into an adjoining one. Then someone in the sitting-room, usually Mr. Murray's eldest daughter, spoke some words that were at once written down, indicating a picture, a gesture, a scene, or an event. Mr. Murray then returned and said what had come into his mind; his words being compared with those spoken by Miss Murray. The agreements are striking, and it is needless to give instances of unquestionable facts. Nevertheless, as Mrs. Verrall has said, it is possible to explain all, or nearly all, by auditive hyperesthesia. Mr. Murray was in no way conscious of having heard anything; so that we are here dealing with subconscious auditive hyperesthesia, a very curious phenomenon that ought to be thoroughly studied. In any case, hyperesthesia pushed to such lengths is very surprising and little removed from cryptesthesia. Sometimes, moreover, the words pronounced by Mr. Murray, when compared with the thing spoken of, went much further than the words spoken aloud by Miss Murray.

These facts are insufficient to make the case one of cryptesthesia, but there are so many other instances of metapsychic cryptesthesia that it is not impossible that this may have come into play here, though I prefer the hypothesis of extreme acuity of hearing.

Visual hyperesthesia, no doubt, is in play in the case of M., a hysterical patient under the care of Dr. Frigerio2 in the asylum

*See the address by G. Murray a la S. P. R., July, 19 15, and Mme. Verrall, P. S\ P. R., xxix. See also S. M. Kingsford: Psychical Research for the Plain Man, London, Kegan Paul, 1920.

2Rari fenomeni osservati in una ipnotizzata ed in particulare della suggestione reciproca e della lettura ai occhi chiusi da essa presentati. (Arch, di psi~ chiatria, etc., Torino, xv, 1894, ■•*)■

at Alexandria. When her eyes were closed by fingers pressing on her eyelids, she read at once the titles of books; and in a dull light with her eyelids closed as before, she read the handwriting on a post-card. With a book held so high that it would have been impossible for her to read it even had her eyes been open, the same results were obtained. But this case of retinal hyperesthesia was not studied with the same precision as Chowrin's cases.

Dr. Naum Kotik1 secured some good instances of cryptesthesia with Sophie B., a young girl of fourteen. Her father was an inebriate who finally committed suicide in an asylum. When this man was present, though no one could detect a word or gesture to indicate anything, Sophie could guess her father's thought in a surprising manner; but these experiments cannot be taken into serious consideration, for deception is too easy; though occasionally, in her father's absence, Sophie was able to tell the thought of Dr. Kotik. Here are some examples:

Dr. Kotik's thought. Sophie's answer.

Spitschka. Spitschka. Noshik. Noshik. Plessimeter. Instrument like that used by

(The Russian words signify matches, a knife, scissors, gum, a ring, etc.)

The experiment succeeded even when Sophie, the percipient, was separated from the agent (her father or M. Kotik) by a closed door.

Dr. Kotik concludes absolutely for mental transmission; he even goes so far as to indicate its laws, saying that it is mainly transmitted in a phonetic form and loses some of its energy in passing through a wall.

He made some further experiments with Lydia W., a girl of

lDie Emanation der psycho-physischen Energie, Wiesbaden, 1908.

A coin. Patron. Bulewka. Noshnizy.

glass makers. A button, a coin. A Pa...da... Bulawka.

Noshik...Noshiry.

eighteen, well educated, and an automatic writer. The proofs of spiritist cryptesthesia were many. To cite one only:

There was always a phonetic resemblance between the thought and the word indicated, even when Lydia was making a mistake.

This transmission, however, might be visual, for in another series of experiments, Dr. Kotik looked at a post-card that Lydia could not see, and she wrote automatically a description, sometimes very accurate, of what the card contained. It would seem that this mental transmission was improved when agent and percipient were linked by a wire.

Finally Dr. Kotik tried fixing his thought (of an object, a landscape, or a sentiment) on blank paper, giving the blank sheet to Lydia to guess what his thought had been. The results were astonishing. I will give one instance only.

Dr. Bernstein thought of a landscape — the seashore, a boat with people in it; on the shore a building surrounded with verdure. Lydia saw — "A sheet of water like a mirror; on the shore some houses surrounded by trees; a boat on the water." Chance cannot account for this, though there was some sameness in the pictures to be guessed, the similitude between the image mentally impressed on the paper and that seen by Lydia is too marked.

Dr. Kotik draws the following inferences: Thought is a radiant energy. This energy has physical and psychic properties. It may be called psycho-physical. Originating in the brain, it passes to the extremities of the body. It is transmitted through air with some difficulty, more easily through a metallic conductor, and can be fixed on paper.

According to him there are two conditions to be considered: the sensitiveness of the subject, and the vibratory energy that sets the sensitiveness into action. This vibratory energy was specially studied by Dr. Kotik, but it does not seem distinctive of human thought; it is possible that all things radiate certain vibratory energies, since sensitives indicate not only the things

Dr. Kotik's thought.

Lydia's answer.

Lumiere.?

?

D'apres.

Cheval.

Journal.

Lumiere,

Baiser.

Neige.

Daprer.

Cheval.

Journal.

of which someone has thought, but also inert objects apart from any thought. It seems more cautious to adopt no hypothesis other than that of a special sensibility that enables hypnotized persons and mediums to know that which exists, whether a thought or an object. This may possibly be due to their very strong subconsciousness.

Dr. Rudolph Tischener1 has recently published an important work on lucidity. I shall not enter upon his theoretical disquisitions, the time is not ripe for them, and all such are distressingly frail, but will keep to the facts recorded. Dr. Tischener cites some very remarkable ones.

After having experimented with Mme. de B., who gave some good instances of cryptesthesia to Wasielewski, Dr. Tischener tried a man of thirty-two, named Re., the son of a postal employee, and himself in business. Several words were written out of Re.'s sight, folded, and put into a sealed and opaque (lichtdicht) envelope. (What was the degree of opacity?)

The results of many experiments were remarkable. There could not be transmission of thought, for several of these sealed envelopes were shuffled together, and Dr. Tischener did not know the contents of those handed to Re. Out of 68 trials 24 gave negative results; but this is of no import, for in the 44 that succeeded coincidence is quite impossible as an explanation. Athen for Athen, Barbara for Baelbara, Eberhard for Ebarhard, Madalene for Madelene, and Pater for Dater.

Albert Hofmann (of Mehlen)2 made some curious experiments in telepathy with a Dr. Freudenberg. M. Hofmann had been the percipient in some of Tischener's experiments; in this case he acted as agent, living in a house thirty yards distant. Experiment 1: Hofmann suggested Alaof Koln and Freudenberg said Koln. Experiment 2 failed. Experiment 3, Hofmann suggested Groenendael, and Freudenberg saw a pretty wood with ponds which agrees with the wood of Groenendael near Brussels. In a later series of experiments the agent and percipient were in separate houses 800 metres apart; the transmission of colours and visions were both very distinct. The word "encrier" (inkstand) was transmitted and among others a very strange one: Freudenberg suggested Julius Caesar; Hofmann thought of the bridge at Bonn where there is a statue of Julius

xUber Telepathie und Hellsehen, Munchen, Bergmann, 1920. tVersuche iiber Telepathie (Psych. Stud., January, 1921, 1-12).

Caesar. Unfortunately after these successful trials there was a series of failures.

It is useless to multiply instances. It is not chance; it is not telepathy. Is it retinal super-acuity pushed to the point of cryptesthesia? Or was there some experimental error by which Re. might have seen what Tischener wrote? I do not suppose this to be the case, for Dr. Tischener is well acquainted with possible sources of fraud described by American psychologists.

Dr. Waldemar de Wasielewski1 has reported some cases of pragmatic cryptesthesia which are akin to dowsing experiments. Mile, von B., observed by him under conditions excluding fraud, was often able to state the nature of objects enclosed in boxes well tied with string, to say whether they were of wood or of what kind of metal. In the very imperfect statistics that he gives there were 6 failures in 50 experiments. But we ought to know what was the mathematical probability of success. He also made some experiments on drawings and words enclosed in boxes. The details must be read in the original. Dr. de W. wrote in reversed order and Mile, de B. read as though not reversed; the writing in this instance being in an envelope and not in a box. Dr. de W. thinks, with good reason, that an influence proceeding from the things, rather than telepathy, is in play — that mysterious rhabdic force which, proceeding from subterranean water or metals, causes the muscles of the dowser to bend his hazel rod.

M. Warcollier, a chemical engineer, has made numerous and very methodical experiments on telepathy, not yet published. He has kindly permitted me to see his manuscript. Some of these are on drawings, with himself as percipient, and are very interesting. Among ten experiments, one (the fourth of the series) was extraordinarily successful; the drawing was of a dirigible balloon with a screw; the reproduction was also a dirigible balloon with a screw. Other trials were half successful; the drawing being a tricolour flag, nine successive sketches were made, a tricolour flag being one of them. Experiment No. 8 was on a drawing of a curved hunting-horn; among 5 sketches one was of a snail shell resembling a hunting-horn. The tenth was a parrot; the percipient among his 12 sketches drew a wounded bird falling to earth. Summing up his experiments, M. Warcollier states that out of 35 trials, 13 were negative, 5 must be

1Un cas de lucidite spontanee, A. S. P., June, 1914, xxiv, 165.

eliminated by reason of coincidence that seems really due to chance, 10 were half successful, and 7 were complete successes. The mathematical probabilities are, however, difficult to estimate.

Comparing the different modalities of telepathy that M. Warcollier has studied by methods that would take too much space to detail here, he classifies the comparative facility of transmission

as under:

Colours 70 per cent.

Attitudes 55 per cent.

Drawings 45 per cent.

Objects 38 per cent.

Ideas 37 per cent.

Mental images 10 per cent.

Words and figures 10 per cent.

This is an interesting attempt at classification which requires the fuller confirmation that can only be given by numerous experiments; and it is not easy to find those who, like M. Warcollier, are at the same time both sensitives and also competent to make exact calculations and analyses.

That M. Warcollier is a sensitive is shown by an instance of cryptesthesia happening to himself. Late one evening he went to the house of a friend in the country. He went to bed, fell asleep, and, partially waking up, he saw by the light of the nightlamp a large quadrangular corded package in yellow packing paper. He cried out, "What is that package?" Mme. Warcollier, waking up, was astonished, for there was no such package in the room; her husband then described the thing, which had in fact been taken to that room by mistake and had been left there some time before M. Warcollier's arrival, and then taken away.

M. Abronowski, quoted by M. Warcollier, out of 324 trials, the odds in each separate case being 1 to 3, had 157 successes, say 50 per cent., a total that greatly exceeds the probable number. In these experiments there was hand-contact, which takes away a good deal of their value. However, with one percipient more sensitive than the other, Jeanne Hirschberg, 62 per cent, of successes were obtained without hand-contact. Both M. Warcollier and M. Abronowski have advanced some timid hypotheses to explain telepathy. There is good reason for timidity; the hypothesis that brain A vibrates by transmission of the vibration of brain B is no adequate general explanation, for very often there is lucidity without any vibration of brain B. Spiritualists have a simpler explanation — that the spirits are omniscient and omnipotent; but this is childish. I prefer to avow absolute ignorance what the mechanism and the cause may be.

Lombroso, quoted by Flammarion (La Mort et son Mystere, 1920, p. 255), reports the case of a young hysterical girl who sometimes lost the power of seeing with her eyes, but saw with her ears; she could read printed lines placed at her ears when her eyes were bandaged. On this transposition of senses Flammarion says that the subjects wrongly imagine that they see by their forehead, ears, or stomach. I should rather be inclined to think that, in certain cases at least, there is a real sensory impression on the skin which is perhaps tactile in character.

These instances of hyperesthesia or paresthesia are as unquestionable as the case of Ludovic S., reported by Boirac; but the manifold phenomena of cryptesthesia cannot be referred to superacuity of the senses; this explanation or by transposition of the senses is applicable only to a very limited number of cases; and even in them we cannot be sure that the explanation is correct. A retina capable of perceiving luminous rays that have passed through three sheets of thick cardboard is so different from the normal retina that the study of it belongs more to metapsychics than to physiology.

However, it is perhaps a step in advance to be able, even in some exceptional cases, to attribute some phenomena that seemed inexplicable to extreme acuity of the senses; and it will be very interesting to study this with sensitives. One never knows on beginning an experimental investigation to what unexpected and unhoped-for results it may lead.

C. Lombroso has stated some clear cases of cryptesthesia. He discovered a young commercial clerk called Regis, twenty-one years of age, and in experiments in which he was assisted by Drs. Ottolenghi, Sartoris, and Roncarini, he found that Regis could reproduce some of the experiments of Pickmann, but without contact. Lombroso wrote the word Pitckcrel on a slate. Regis, ten yards distant, having his eyes and ears bandaged, wrote Pitche on another slate. He was given a drawing in an envelope, and he then (with bandaged eyes) made an astonishingly correct facsimile. There were some failures. Regis had on that day drunk a pint of rum and was very drunk, which is not a good condition in which to work a fraud. M. B. (of

Nocera), aged twenty, gave Dr. Grimaldi, with Lombroso present, some interesting instances of cryptesthesia.1

Other experiments on telepathy have recently been undertaken by Drs. F. H. Van Loon and A. Weinberg.2

As their memorandum has not yet been published in its entirety, no definite opinion can be expressed. Seemingly it favours telepathy, and emotional feelings seem to have been more readily perceptible than names, numbers, and figures. With cards there were failures. When one of the agents tasted sweets or hydrochloric acid the result was a success. (But were full precautions taken?) It is difficult to draw any conclusions from this laborious series of experiments initiated under some very doubtful notions drawn from "thought-transference" and the "willing game." The good faith of the percipients is unquestionable; but there may have been slight subconscious sensorial stimuli awaking vague perceptions, without any metapsychic influence. However honest the percipients may be, conditions must always be as severe as if they were under suspicion, for the subconsciousness is always on the alert, and grasps at the very slightest indications that may put it on the track. If the agent raises a weight and the percipient says that he feels fatigue, extreme precautions must be taken that the percipient, whose senses are hyper-acute, should have no means of knowing that a weight is being lifted behind him. All movement on the part of the agent must be absolutely eliminated before we can conclude that cryptesthesia is present.

The phenomena presented by Mr. Reese3 must be referred to pragmatic cryptesthesia.

The facts which we shall now summarize have been recorded by very well-informed observers — Carrington, Schrenck-Notzing, and J. Maxwell — who experimented separately with Reese. Mr. Carrington has made a special study of prestidigitation, and is an experienced psychologist.

Mr. Reese was sixty-two years of age in 1913. He was a native of Posen in Prussian Poland, and then went to America,

xMon enquite sur la transmission de la pensee, A. S. P., 1904, xiv, 264-273. *A Method of investigation into thought transference (J. S. P. R., January, 1921, 3-23.

8A. Schrenck-Notzinff, Un clairvoyant, A. S. P., 1913. xxiii, 65. J. Maxwell, Mime sujet, ibid., 67. Carrington, Compte rendu d'une stance avec Bert Reese (ibid., 357).

where he lived for many years. He tells of many interviews with prominent men, especially with leading American financiers, for one of his gifts was the ability to discover springs of water and also oil wells. He gave many striking instances of lucidity.

Edison reports experiences with Reese that seemed decisive to him. He went into a room far from that in which Reese was sitting and wrote, "Is there anything better than hydroxide of nickel for an alkaline electric battery?" He then returned to Reese, who at once said, "No, there is nothing better than hydroxide of nickel for an alkaline battery." Two years later Edison received an unexpected visit from Reese. Edison then wrote the word "Keno" in microscopic characters, and put the paper in his pocket. He asked Reese, "What have I written?" and Reese answered "Keno," without hesitation.

Dr. James Hanna Thompson, an alienist and an avowed sceptic, was absolutely convinced after a seance with Reese (A. S. P., August, 1913).

Schrenck-Notzing declares that Reese is one of the most extraordinary men of the time. Schrenck wrote on five pieces of paper the questions: (1) What is my mother's name? (2) When will you go to Germany? (3) Will my book be a success? (4) An intimate question not detailed, and (5) What is the name of my eldest son? Reese, without touching, or barely touching, the papers answered four of the questions in as many minutes, and all idea of thought-reading can be eliminated, for Schrenck-Notzing, having mixed the papers, did not know the contents of the one presented.

With J. Maxwell equally surprising results were obtained. Reese did not touch the seven papers which Maxwell had written, but answered each though Maxwell did not know what each as given to Reese contained. The first name of Maxwell's mother (an uncommon one) was given with a slight error, Marie Angeline for Marie Angelie.

H. Carrington describes in great detail a similar experience; he notes carefully that the regular tricks of legerdemain could not be used, and after a very methodical investigation concludes the case to be one of genuine clairvoyance.

Mr. F. Hollaender gives another very interesting account of a seance that he had with Reese. According to him, Reese was able to indicate to a commercial firm the page on which there was a fraudulent entry. He was given 5 per cent, of the amount of the fraud, this payment amounting to 2500 marks. He gave Mr. Hollaender accurate answers to personal, intimate, and special questions that Mr. H. had written in Reese's absence, and had kept in his pockets.1 According to Miss Scatcherd, the same facts are confirmed by M. Drakoules.2 The same experiment was made with the same success: M. Drakoules wrote various phrases on eighteen papers which he folded and placed in different drawers. Reese read them all while still in the drawers, and gave correctly the names of Mme. Drakoules's three daughters — Penelope, Anastasia, and Giuletta.

In 1916 Reese was convicted, in New York, of "disorderly conduct." On appeal he convinced the judge, Rosalsky, not only of his innocence, but also of his lucidity (A. S. P., May, 1916).

The testimony of the able, sagacious, and cautious men above named leaves no doubt at all of the pragmatic cryptesthesia exhibited by Reese. It is a misfortune that he declines to submit to fresh tests.3

Another remarkable case of lucidity is given by Professor Schottelius, of Stuttgart; Ludovic H., a Jew, aged forty, gave similar tests. Schottelius, alone in his room, wrote on three papers what then came into his mind. He took one in his right and one in his left hand, clenched, and Ludovic read both. A judge of first instance, an alienist doctor, the medical councillor of the district, and a legal authority, all persons not to be suspected of credulity, made similar experiments with Ludovic (A. S. P., March, 1914, xxiv, 65). I have very recently verified cryptesthesia in full force with Mr. O., a Polish engineer. At Warsaw, in April, 1921, Geley, Lange, and I had the opportunity of observing him with care, and we found that the marvellous accounts given of his powers were in no way exaggerated. After dinner one day Lange, remote from Mr. O., wrote some words on a scrap of paper and put it in an envelope, which he closed. Mr. O., crumpling the paper in his hand without opening the envelope, said, "It is written in English. I see one separate letter, then 'cons' and then 'vendredi.' " Mr. Lange had written, "I consider you are wonderful." This is particularly interesting

Encore le voyant Reese, le juif eternel, A. S. P., September, 19 13, xxiii, 257-261.

^International Psychic Gazette, March, 191 6.

8Max Hoppe (Ueber Hcllsehen, Diss, in., Berlin, 1916) has criticized these experiments with Reese, but his hypothesis that they are due half to chance and half to sagacity seems to me very feeble.

as it seems to indicate a visual perception rather than a reading of the thought.

The next morning, at the Hotel d'Europe, Mr. O. came to visit me. I wrote a pkrase that came into my mind without there having been any conversation to arouse it, "The sea never appears so great as when it is calm. Its fury lessens it." Mr. O., standing in the middle of the room, could see nothing of what I was writing, and in any case could only have observed from afar and upside down. I folded the paper, put it in an envelope, and closed it. Mr. O. kneaded it in his hands feverishly without opening it, and after ten minutes said, "I see much water! much water! You want to attach some idea to the sea. The sea is so great that beside its motion... I can see no more." An admirable result, although extreme criticism might say that he might subsconsciously have partly seen what I was writing.

Such objections could not apply in the next experiment, which is more demonstrative despite some marked mistakes. I took two letters received the day before, and when alone in my room placed them in envelopes that I carefully closed. Taking one of them at random, whether it were A or B, I gave it to Mr. O. on his arrival. He then said, "It is a letter in French that does not come from Paris; it is an answer to a letter of yours. A man of fifty speaks of a lady whose name is German rather than French; he invites you to come where he is, at the sea-side; it is in his mind to go to Paris,,, and he added other details, some not characteristic, and some erroneous. He then said, "Keep that letter. M. Geley can give it to me tomorrow and I will finish reading it." The next day Geley, to whom I had given the envelope, still closed and without saying anything of the contents of the letter, got an immediate answer from Mr. O., "It speaks of a Mme. Berger. The letter is written by a man of fifty; it is an invitation; it comes from the sea-side." Now this letter, of which neither Mr. O. nor Dr. Geley knew anything, and of which nothing could be seen by normal senses, was from a German professor, R. Berger, at Berlin, in answer to a letter of mine, asking me to see him on my return (from Warsaw). He is about fifty.

Geley's experience was perhaps even better. He wrote on a visiting card, holding it on his knee under the table, "Nothing is more moving than the call to prayer by the muezzins." The card, still kept under the table, was put into a thick envelope, and closed.

Mr. O. said, 'There is a feeling of prayer, a call, from men who are being killed or wounded.... No, it is not that.... Nothing gives rise to more emotion than the call to prayer, it is like a call to prayer, to whom? A certain caste of men, Mazzi — madz.... A card. I can see no more/'

There were some other experiments equally astonishing, which I shall not detail, as we shall shortly have the opportunity of observing this cryptesthesia at the Metapsychic Institute with all necessary minuteness.

In short, cryptesthesia in these exceptionally gifted beings — clairvoyants — cannot be called in question.



(c) Crystal Vision

Vision by the crystal seems to be favourable to the development of cryptesthesia in sensitives. This method seems to have been used by magicians in all ages (the magic mirror).

Grasset (loc. cit., 135-143) mentions the ancient methods of divination by the water of a spring (hydromancy) or by vessels filled with oil (lecanomancy) by which Ulysses enquired of Tiresias; or by mirrors, or crystal spheres. Sometimes a fingernail covered with oil was used. In the sixteenth century Dr. John Dee showed a small crystal in which the future could be read. Saint-Simon tells in his memoirs how a rogue showed the Duke of Orleans all that he wanted to know in a glass of water.1

When a sensitive looks into the crystal, objects, moving pictures, and persons are often seen. Mrs. Verrall says, "The visions obtained by looking fixedly into a glass of water or a crystal ball differ from visual impressions; a certain amount of darkness

*A very detailed summary has been given by Miss X., Recent experiments in crystal vision, P. S. P. R., May, 1889, v, 486-504. See also Adeline Fr. von May, Visionen itn Wasserglasse, 1876. Hyslop, Experiments in crystal vision, P. S. P. R., xii, 259. F. Myers, Experiments in crystal vision, P. S. P. R., viii, 459- P- Janet, On experiment in crystal vision, ibid., xv, 385. A. Lang, On crystal vision, ibid., xv, 48-50. Fr. Myers, De la conscience subliminale, A. S. P., 1897, No- 5; 1898, Nos. 2, 3, and 4; 1899, Nos. 3, 4, and 5; 1900, Nos. 1 and 2.

The Seeress of Prevorst sometimes saw whole scenes in soap bubbles blown before her.

Besides the writings of Fr. Myers, Subliminal Consciousness, consult P. Janet, Automatisme psychologique, and Andrew Lang, The Making of Religion, 1897, trad, et anal, par E. Lefebvre, A. S. P., 1898, viii, 129-148. Andrew Lang, Dreams and Ghosts, 1897. W. Stead, Real ghosts, 1897, 65-66. P. Joire, Methode d' experimentation, etc., A. S. P., 1901, xi, 329.

favours the appearance of the images. These images seem to be made with the bright points in the crystal, and, once produced, they have a reality that no imagination can invent. Sometimes there is movement; sometimes I know that there is such and such a colour, though I cannot see it optically."

Miss A., who is not a professional medium, and whose name has not been published, thus describes her impressions: "I knew nothing about crystal vision, when one day, being at lunch with some friends, the conversation turned on this subject. They declared that visions could be seen in a glass of clear water. I looked and seemed to see a small golden key at the bottom of my glass. It was so distinct that I looked on the table-cloth, thinking it was really there." Subsequently Miss A., having made other experiments with a crystal ball, thus describes her sensations: The crystal is wrapped in black material leaving only a part open to the sight. The darkness does not matter. After one or two minutes a bright light appears which fades, becomes a fog in which landscapes appear, or letters, sometimes written reversed. The scenes are very interesting, sometimes having no connection with any real event.

According to Miss X., the things seen in the crystal have true colours; they are like remembered scenes but more distinct.

Mr. Hyslop has given some instances of crystal vision (P. S. P. R., 1898, xii, pp. 259-276). These were obtained by Mrs. D. and were very distinct. He verifies frequent coincidence of the vision with real events, but does not think that chance coincidence can be disregarded. The instances are, however, so numerous and striking that they would seem to show true lucidity. In one case Mrs. D. saw, near her sister, a person unknown to her in a coffin, a friend unknown to Mrs. D. being then extremely ill in the sister's house. The patient was recognized among seven photographs brought by Mr. Hyslop (in this particular case the vision was in a dream, not in the crystal). In another case, by the crystal, Mrs. D. saw the cemetery, but different from what she thought it to be. The new arrangement of the tombs was really as she saw it, as she found on visiting the cemetery to verify the facts. This is possibly a case of paramnesia (believing that one remembers things not seen).

In fine, Mr. Hyslop concludes that crystal vision, in Mrs. D.'s case at least, does not give the certitude of supernormal cognizance that strict science demands.

The Rev. P. Lescoeur (quoted by Grasset, loc. tit., 140) states that he knew a woman who, on looking into a glass of water, saw to her great surprise an apparition of the head of Christ, expressive of great pain. "I drew back, with an exclamation of amazement; but on looking again the Ecce Homo face appeared in profile, then grew less distinct and vanished. It had lasted about a minute.,, This is a hallucination brought about by crystal vision, but has no connection with cryptesthesia.

Myers made a careful study of crystal vision, especially with Miss Freer. The subject is requested to look attentively, but not so as to produce fatigue, in a mirror or some transparent object, arranged so as to reflect surrounding objects or the face of the observer as little as possible. If a crystal ball is used it is surrounded with black material. It is best that the subject should be alone in the room and should be mentally passive. After ten minutes or so he sometimes sees that the glass or the crystal becomes dim and some object seems to appear in it or on it. About one person in twenty may succeed in this experiment, and among twenty seers, perhaps one only is capable of developing this faculty of internal vision sufficiently to receive veridical impressions that could not be obtained by normal means.

Crystal vision does not produce the major hypnotic sleep as has sometimes been affirmed. It seems to have no effect on health other than fatigue if the experiment is prolonged.

Few phenomena, Myers states, are so fantastical and improbable. The visions do not seem to follow any law; they are a mixture of remembrances, dreams, telepathic or telesthetic recognitions and precognitions. In short, crystal-gazing is an empirical method of arousing cryptesthesia; the mechanism by which this comes to pass is unknown.

Mrs. Leeds, whose husband is on night duty on the railway, wakes up suddenly in the night; she raises a glass of water from the night-table to her lips, and sees in the water the moving image of a railway train with a guard's look-out van at one end. She then sees the trucks hurled on one another, and the guard's van damaged. Two hours later, Mr. Leeds comes in and tells his wife that there has been an accident, the brakeman being badly hurt (/. S\ P. R., December, 1903).

