As all the cases of ectoplasm cannot be quoted I select the following. On December 18, 1914, Countess Castelvitch, Mme. Ponsa, Mme. Furtado, M. and Mme. Lacombe were present in the house of the Countess Castelvitch. Through the table Mme. Furtado's husband was alleged to be present, but that he would not allow himself to be photographed because he had forgotten zuliat his face MLS like, but he said that his companion would come in his place. This companion was his mistress, he having been separated from his wife; and in fact a veiled woman was photographed, causing great fear in Mme. Furtado, who declared she would never be present at any more seances. At the next seance (December 27, 1914), M Furtado announced his presence again and said, "I have no face, but I will make one/' and the phantom photographed is a tall person clothed in white, but the face is that of a death's-head (Fig. 24).

It is difficult or impossible to imagine that these are frauds or illusions. Fraud was not easy. In order to show a French officer, a nun, a phantom with a death's-head, and an Arab soldier a whole series of costumes would be needed, to be bought at a shop and to be used at the seances where hands were held, if not rigorously, yet sufficiently well. And why should this be done? If Mme. Lacombe wished to deceive she might have given stranger things. There is no reason to suspect the good faith of Mme.

Fig. 24. — Materialization of M. Furtado, with a death's-head (after Mme. Frondoni-Lacombe).

Furtado, who was very sceptical, nor of Mme. Ponsa, who was Mme. Lacombe's intimate friend.

Although it is probable that Countess Castelvitch was the principal medium, Madeleine Frondoni-Lacombe also had remarkable phenomena in full light when alone with her friend, Mme. d'Andrade (p. 208), who also had some manifestations that seem genuine. Holding both of Mme. d'Andrade's hands, Mme. Lacombe saw in full sunlight a parasol rise up, lower itself, and advance, rolling round with a waving motion. Raps were made at a distance at request. It is therefore permissible to think that Mme. Lacombe also is a medium.

I infer that the ectoplasms observed by her are genuine. If they stood alone in metapsychic science they would certainly not suffice to produce conviction, for Madeleine Lacombe has not the scientific standing to warrant our basing our conclusions on hers; but all that she has seen agrees too well with all we have learned from the experiments with Home, Eusapia, Marthe Beraud, Stanislawa, and Miss Goligher for the Lisbon experiments to be rejected. Though there may be exaggerations and inexactitudes here and there, the facts can be taken as true in the main. Countess Castelvitch was a very powerful medium; it is to be regretted that she should not have been studied under conditions rather more stringent than those imposed by her friend, Mme. Lacombe.

These experiments are probably at an end. After a seance on July 14, 1920, in which an apport (an owl's head sculptured in stone) is alleged (a phenomenon that must be strongly contested), a seance was held on August 3d at which the spirit declared that he was about to leave... Hoja ultimo dia que posso mom festar mc (today is the last day on which I can manifest). In the same way Katie King took leave of Crookes, we do not know why.

There were also some subjective phenomena, to which I do not refer, as they are poor in comparison with the cryptesthesia already described, and the Lisbon seances are mainly objective.

In the house of M. Corrales, an honourable merchant of San Jose, Costa Rica, some seemingly fine materializations took place. His daughter Ofelia claimed great mediumistic powers. Several seances were held at which various notables of San Jose were present. Various materializations appeared (Don Constantino and Mary Brown, who spoke very correct English).

Ofelia was seen sometimes in full light at the same time as Mary Brown who was touched, heard, and photographed {A, S. P., 1910, xx, 324). The phantom Mary seemed to merge into Ofelia from whom she emanated, and to inspire her.

All this reads very well, but despite the imposing list of persons who attest the genuineness of the phenomena, all scientific value must be denied to these experiences. M. Corrales, Ofelia's father, says in so many words: "It is proved that Mary introduced an unknown girl into the room.', This enigmatical statement leaves open all kinds of possibilities. It would be an injury to science to give any place at all to these fraudulent experiences.1

Experiments made with Lucia Sordi, which at first satisfied M. Marzorati, did not stand Schrenck-Notzing's severer test. Lucia was enclosed in a wooden cage, and (in the dark) when in trance, she emerged from it, but Schrenck had a wooden ball made of the same size as her head and showed that it could easily be pushed between the bars by bending them (Luce c Ombra, x, November, 1910, and A. S. P., xxi, January, 1911, 225-230). »

Colonel and Mme. Peters at the Lodge Psyche in Berlin saw a striking materialized form. The seance took place in a small room sufficiently lit by a red light. The medium (a masked woman) was asleep in a chair. First a masculine figure, whose body was not visible below the knees, appeared beside her; then another form, the so-called nun Cordula, taller by a head than the medium, wearing the Dominician habit. Her face was entirely human, with shining eyes. She swayed in the air, floated high in the room for three minutes at a height of nearly three yards, making gestures and saying, "Look how my eyes shine!" She then vanished by degrees, the medium being all the time in the same place about a yard and a half from the apparition (A. S. P., 1907, xxvii, 2535).

Eglinton was a very powerful medium, and though he has been suspected of fraud, he was able finally to prove that the allegations of his enemies were calumnies. Moreover, the question is not to establish that he was never guilty of trickery (which is not easy in the case of a professional medium) but whether in certain definite instances striking metapyschic phenomena have been produced (Erny, loc. cit., 159).

'Mr. Willy Reichel (Psychische Studien, October, iqio, and A. S. P., 191 1, xxi, 140) considers these as manifest frauds. C. de Vesme has defended them. But things being as they are, no account should be taken of these alleged phenomena even by the best natured persons (A. S. P., 191 1, xxi, 214).

*The authoritativeness of seances that give materializations should always be compared with those at which Eusapia's phenomena were observed. For twenty years, at Milan, Genoa, Rome, Naples, Turin, Paris, Ribaud Island, Carqueiranne, TAgnelas, Cambridge, Montfort l'Amaury, and Washington, Eusapia was scrutinized, analyzed, and thoroughly studied by such men of science as Schiaparelli, Oliver Lodge, Lombroso, Myers, Aksakoff, De Rochas, A. de Gramont, P. Curie, Morselli, Bozzano, Ochorowicz, Foa, Bottazzi, Vassallo, Feilding, Carrington, Maxwell, Dariex, and others. It will probably be long before an equally imposing list of unexceptionable witnesses can be produced in any other case.

Miss Glyn, who did not believe in materializations, saw Eglinton at her own house, at a seance at which her father, her brother, and a friend were present. Eglinton was in the middle of this little circle, and his hands were held. Two forms appeared that could move and speak. Miss Glyn recognized them for her mother and her younger brother. The forms slowly disappeared. Phantoms are often too readily recognized, and the desire to secure this recognition detracts much from the value of the attestation.

Dr. Carter Blake, with five persons well known in English intellectual society, narrates that he saw by the side of Eglinton, who was sitting in an armchair, a tall brown form that melted into the medium's body.

The distinguished naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace, in a letter to Erny, states that he saw Eglinton at a seance in a private house. By his side there appeared Abdullah, a materialized Oriental wearing sandals, a turban, and burnous; Eglinton being visible at the same time sitting in an armchair in evening dress. After the seance Eglinton was undressed and most carefully searched but neither sandals, turban, nor burnous were found.

Important seances were held at the house of the artist, J. Tissot, who has represented one result in a very beautiful picture. Eglinton sat in an armchair, close to Tissot, and stayed there the whole time. The doors were locked. After a brief space two forms appeared by Tissot's side. At first they were nebulous, but gradually became clear so that all their features could be seen. The male form had in his hand a kind of light with which he lit up the feminine form. M. Tissot recognized the latter, and, much moved, asked her to kiss him; she did so several times and her lips were seen to move.

Dr. Nichols experimented with Eglinton, putting him in a cage with a net over it. The doors of the cage were closed with sealed knots and the approaches to the cage were dusted with flour. The forms appeared outside the cage. Another time, at Dr. Nichols's house, in daylight, but behind closed curtains, there was a materialization in human form, which, in order to be recognized, raised the curtain to show itself in the daylight. It then slowly dematerialized till there remained nothing but the lower part of the body which vanished abruptly.

Florence Marryat and her husband assisted at a remarkable private seance in which they saw a whitish, cloudy substance emerge from the left hip of the medium; this cloud increased in size, condensed, and became a materialized form that stood before Eglinton. She also studied the materializations given by Mr. Arthur Coleman who was not a professional medium. He was tied with cotton threads that would break at the least movement. Before the five sitters six forms appeared and were seen by the light of a gas-burner. During this time Coleman was entranced in the next room.

Mr. Stainton Moses often saw living forms about him. His friend, Mr. Charlton Speer, reports, among many other facts, as follows: "I had my hand on the paper, writing, when Mr. Moses, sitting just opposite me, said, There is a column of light in front of you.' Shortly after he said that the column had grown into a spirit, whose head and shape he described." It is very doubtful if this figure was objective; apparently it was seen by Stainton Moses only.

Heavy blows were heard in full daylight by Mr. Speer and Stainton Moses out of doors on the rails of the line to Southend. These knocks (which were intelligent) could be heard fifty yards away. Mr. Moses notes also vague, luminous forms near the table and simultaneous knockings. Reference has already been made to telekinesis in his presence, but materializations were exceptional.

In 1905 the Rev. Mr. Colley, archdeacon of Canterbury, made some astonishing experiments with the Rev. Monck, the medium studied by Reiners and Oxley, quoted by Delanne (p. 521). The gas-jet was fully lit and Colley was at the side of the entranced medium, holding him up. A vapour emerged from the medium's black clothes, and became a cloud which gradually condensed into white draperies surrounding the apparitions. A child appeared who moved in the room just like a living child, and was kissed by those present, then returned to the medium and was gradually absorbed by him and disappeared, melting into his body. On the same day a beautiful woman appeared, born from a fluidic filament emanating from Monck and re-absorbed by him. In another seance an Oriental form calling itself the Mahdi was seen two yards distant from Monck: "The Mahdi wore a metallic helmet that I could touch; it seemed to melt like snow at my touch, resuming its form a moment later." This phantom was strong: Mr. Colley one day seized it in his arms, and then, "an irresistible force flung me about six yards to the place where the medium was standing; and I found myself clasping the medium, with white muslin over his black coat. I was holding him in my arms as I had thought to hold the Mahdi."

This statement led to the supposition that Mr. Colley was the victim of a fraud; but he had seen the vapour becoming a cloud and materializing into garments covering a body.

One materialized form called itself Samuel, and the medium was seen to clasp Samuel's hand fraternally and walk with him round the room. The archdeacon wrote: "I publish these things for the first time, having meditated over them in silence for twenty-eight years, giving my word as a clergyman for things which imperil my ecclesiastical position and my future advancement."

There was a celebrated lawsuit on this. The conjurer Maskelyne undertook to repeat the phenomena by trick. He wagered £1,000 and lost his suit. The illustrious A. R. Wallace gave evidence in support of Mr. Colley.

Dr. Hirschmann, President of the Anthropological Society of Liverpool, obtained most interesting results with a non-professional medium, Mr. B. Many photographs were taken of apparitions, their height was measured, their weight taken, and their pulse observed, just as if they were living bodies. These apparitions, he says, seemed to organize themselves from a nebulous mass, and they disappeared suddenly. In one photograph a nebulous connection is seen between the chest of the medium and that of the phantom.

At the house of Professor E., of Christiania, in 1893, M. de Bergen arranged a series or seances with Mme. d'Esperance, in which many distinguished persons belonging to the university, the magistrature, and the clergy took part.

In one of these seances an extremely beautiful female form appeared calling herself Nepenthes. "She showed herself in the light at the same time as the medium, who was sitting with other persons outside the cabinet, and materialized in the midst of the circle. She plunged her hand into liquid paraffin wax, leaving a mould of rare beauty. The modeller who made the plaster cast could not believe his eyes and spoke of sorcery, because he could not imagine how the hand could have been extricated from the wax glove.

"Nepenthes dematerialized in the midst of the circle. She lowered her head on which her usual diadem shone, and little by little became a luminous cloud like a human head (on which the diadem still faintly showed) gradually fading away."

Professor Aksakoff published a memorandum of Mine. d'Esperance1 to which it would seem too much importance has been ascribed.

Mr. Carrington has shown that if there was no fraud, fraud was quite possible. Professor Aksakoff very loyally gives the evidence of several persons present at this alleged dematerialization who did not accept it as genuine, for example, the engineer, Schonelz (p. 92). The honesty of Mme. d'Esperance may very well be admitted while supposing that by an unconscious backward movement of her legs she may have given rise to the notion or may have herself thought that her lower limbs were dematerialized for a time.

A medium named Sambor, a former telegraphist, gave a series of seances from 1896 to 1902, which are recorded in the Russian spiritist journal, Rebus. Petrovo Solovovo, a skilful experimentalist and scientifically sceptical, had given an analysis of these seances, especially of those at which he was present. But he has since raised some justifiable doubts even on the latter.2

In 1899, in the house of Mme. de A., the materialized form of a little girl appeared between the curtains, Sambor being in the chain formed by the linked hands of the sitters. A white column seemed to rise from the floor and move towards Sambor. This materialized form (Olia) raised a table into the air, and a small (child's) hand touched the sitters. On another occasion, only Mr. S. and Mr. Bonjunski being present, a form, Friedrich, appeared, quite different from Sambor both in stature and gestures; this materialization and Sambor were seen together, walking about the room. The light was good, and all took place in Mr. Bonjuntki'a small room in Petersburg on June 20, 1899, at which time of year there is practically no night. Among other phenomena, Friedrich wrote something on the inside of the glass of Mr. S.'s watch.

Mr. Erfurt, the director of a printing works at Petersburg, prepared a cone of sheet-iron, with a piece of paper and a pencil inside it. M. Zabasky and M. Eichwald, engineers, closed the cone with an iron cover fixed on with special rivets. This cone was left for several days in a room that Sambor had never entered. In the seance of March 8, 1902, Sambor declared that something had been written; the cone was opened, not without difficulty, and

*A. Aksakoff, Vn cos de materialisation particlle du corps d'un me'dtum. Enqudtes et commentaires, Paris, Libr. de I'Art independant, 1896.

%A. S. P., November and December, 1899, ix, 105 and 109, xi, 243-256; 1902, xii, 257-302.

after having verified that everything was intact some words were found written in pencil on the paper.

Mme. Youdenitch has communicated to A. S. P. (1904, xiv, 193) details on the seances that took place in the house of M. Olchowski. There was almost complete darkness. Hands were joined, so that the hands of the medium were never free. The little girl Olia appeared at Sambor's side. She could be seen and touched and she was heard to speak. She was luminous and bluish white in colour, and seemed to tremble the whole time. Her features were ill-defined, and she disappeared by degrees, vanishing "like a tremulous ribbon/' In an adjoining room, where there was certainly no one, a mandolin had been placed, which began to play of itself. This white mandolin, visible in the faint light, was tea) to come from the room where it was and settle on the table in the seance room.

The hypothesis of an accomplice will explain some of these phenomena, but not all. This hypothesis that seems so unlikely at first sight was actually proved. Petrovo Solovovo learned, later, that one of the sitters intentionally released Sambor's hand that he was supposed to be holding. There is therefore nothing to be said on the so-called phenomenon of the chair. But this does not explain the phantom seen by all at Sambor's side; for the complicity seems to have been limited to the release of one hand. All the same, legitimate doubts may be cast upon all Sambor's mediumship, for there is no certainty of his probity nor that of the circle.

It is scarcely worth while to mention the very old experiments by Dale Owen in New York in 1860, and as the phenomena were given by one of the Fox sisters, then Mrs. Underhill, they cannot be trusted. Still, it is probable, as in so many cases with Leah Fox, that there was an admixture of genuine phenomena. Dr. Gray cut off a piece of the garment of the materialized form, which melted little by little in his hands (Erny, loc. cit., 133). This must be accepted as genuine unless Dr. Gray were a low impostor. A New York banker, Mr. Livermore, had about a hundred seances at his own house with Leah Fox and many times recognized his deceased wife whom he ardently desired to see.

At a private seance in Australia, Mr. Brown, experimenting with one of his friends who was a medium, hung a curtain across one corner of his room. The medium retired behind this curtain, and twelve materialized forms appeared in succession among whom Mr. Brown believed that he recognized two deceased sons of his.

M. Stiegler narrates (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 641) a spiritist seance at Aries directed by J. Bayol, an eminent surgeon of the French Navy, subsequently Governor of Upper Nigeria. The medium was a young employee of the Paris-Lyons Railway. Lights appeared on the ceiling and a greenish-blue ring appeared over the heads of the sitters. Details given are few.

Baron Hillenbach of Vienna had some seances there with Mme. Toeffer at his own house, Dr. Tieber assisting. Mme. Toeffer, sitting on a sofa, was covered by a net nailed to the floor all round. A form appeared which raised the curtain, and while so holding it, Mme. Toeffer could be seen in a state of trance, with her arms hanging down.

Lucy Stout witnessed a materialization in a wooden house in Kansas City (Missouri). She specially observed its dematerialization. The form approached the medium's cabinet, became cloudy and transparent, and was transformed into a luminous mass which finally disappeared.

M. Fremery, at La Haye, in the house of Mme. Huygens, saw a tall white form surmounted by a luminous sphere, the medium being motionless behind the curtains. By degrees this condensed into a hand which rose to the ceiling, holding a palm-branch. The luminous hand then descended to the table. Only the hand and arm were materialized and seemed to be those of a child of fourteen (A. S. P., 1908, xvii, 256).

Another experience was very interesting: "A phosphorescent cloud developed, moving quickly towards us, rose up, condensed, flowed to the ground, and disappeared behind the curtain. Then a luminous arm of abnormal length emerged from the curtain, a luminous disk in a phosphorescent cloud moved quickly towards a chair which was displaced, whilst the medium remained visible to all of us sitting in the cabinet" (A. S. P., 1908, xvii, 309).

An American sculptor, Mr. Brackett, experimenting with Mrs. F., of Boston, thus describes the disappearance of the phantom of his wife: 'This form did not resemble her; but told me intimate things that she alone could know. Suddenly the form sank down and disappeared through the floor which was covered with a thick carpet; the head and shoulders remained visible to the last." The similarity to the Villa Carmen phenomena will be noted.

Mr. Brackett saw two materialized forms together with the medium, and verified that they underwent transformation. "I saw a tall young man who called himself the brother of Mrs. X., who was with me, and as Mrs. X. said she could not recognize him (having only known him as a child), the form shrank little by little till it assumed the form of the little boy that Mrs. X. had known/' "Sometimes," says Mr. Brackett, "the form dematerialized before me and I at once verified that the medium was sleeping/'

These diverse experiments, which have not been repeated, and which are testified to only by certain observers possibly devoid of the necessary scepticism, do not seem to me such as to shake the negative convictions of scientists. But this is not the case with the phenomena recorded of Home, Florence Cook, Eusapia, and Miss Goligher which are unassailable. Those of Marthe-Eva, of Linda Gazzera, Mrs. Salmon, Eglinton, and Mme. Lacombe acquire full value from the others, and this value is considerable; nor do I see reason to dismiss entirely those of M. Corrales, Sambor, and perhaps those of Mme. d'Esperance.

I think I have mentioned all the cases of experimental materialization that seem worthy of notice; but one can never be sure of giving a complete list, and I apologize in advance for any

omissions.1

Nothing in the history of materializations would give more positive proof than the production of moulds obtained under unexceptionable experimental conditions, from materialized forms dematerializing themselves.

Aksakoff (./..V. /'., 1S97, vii, 28) cites various cases of moulds obtained by fluidic hands making impressions on flour, plaster, or paraffin wax. According to him the first experiments of this kind go back to 1855 (Banner of Light, April 1, 1855, and August 10, 1867).*

The facts narrated by Aksakoff did not convince me; even the putty cast of Eusapia's head did not seem to me certain, and I was

!I prefer not to allude to the unpublished experiments which were told me at Warsaw or described to me by letter, by persons of good standing. They arc so stupefying and hugely improbable that I unfortunately cannot bring myself to believe them. And yet...

•See also Zollner and Wagner (Psychische Studicn, 1877, 401; 1878, 492; 1879. 249); and Spiritualist, 1878, 134.

sure that we had nothing really evidential in the way of moulds, when in 1921 we were able to study these phenomena with a Polish medium — Kluski — at the Metapsychic Institute.

Geley and I took the precaution of introducing, unknown to any other person, a small quantity of cholesterin in the bath of melted paraffin wax placed before the medium during the seance. This substance is soluble in paraffin without discolouring it, but on adding sulphuric acid it takes a deep violet-red tint; so that we could be absolutely certain that any moulds obtained should be from the paraffin provided by ourselves. We therefore had certain proof that the moulds obtained could not have been prepared in advance but must have been produced during the seance itself. Absolute certainty was thus secured.

During the seance the medium's hands were held firmly by Geley and myself on the right and on the left, so that he could not liberate either hand. A first mould was obtained of a child's hand, then a second of both hands, right and left; a third time of a child's foot. The creases in the skin and the veins were visible on the plaster casts made from the moulds.

By reason of the narrowness at the wrist these moulds could not be obtained from living hands, for the whole hand would have to be withdrawn through the narrow opening at the wrist. Professional modellers secure their results by threads attached to the hand, which are pulled through the plaster. In the moulds here considered there was nothing of the sort; they were produced by a materialization followed by dematerialization, for this latter was necessary to disengage the hand from the paraffin "glove."

These experiments, which we intend to resume on account of their importance, afford an absolute proof of a materialization followed by dematerialization, for even if the medium had the means to produce the results by a normal process, he could not have made use of them. We defy the most skilful modellers to obtain such moulds without using the plan of two segments separated by thread and afterwards reunited.

We therefore affirm that there was a materialization and dematerialization of an ectoplasmic or fluidic hand, and we think that this is the first time that such rigorous conditions of experiment have been imposed.

There is ample proof that experimental materialization (ectoplasmic) should take definite rank as a scientific fact. Assuredly we do not understand it. It is very absurd, if a truth can be

absurd.

Spiritualists have blamed me for using this word "absurd"; and have not been able to understand that to admit the reality of these phenomena was to me an actual pain; but to ask a physiologist, a physicist, or a chemist to admit that a form that has a circulation of blood, warmth, and muscles, that exhales carbonic arid, has weight, speaks, and thinks, can issue from a human body is to ask of him an intellectual effort that is really painful.

Yes, it is absurd; but no matter — it is true.

Further, materializations must not be considered as isolated phenomena. They must be considered along with telekinesis and collective hallucinations. Taken together they carry indisputable proofs before which the imperfect science of today must bow. The function of science is first of all to verify; and then, if possible, to understand.1

'At the Copenhagen Congress (vide Revue Metapsychique, p. 364) Mme. Bisson read a report of some astounding facts that must be admitted in despite of their wild improbability, because of the known exactitude of Mme. Bisson's experimental methods. The events narrated took place on May 25, 1 92 1, before six persons in full daylight. The ectoplasm, called "the substance" by Mme. Bisson, was transformed into a tiny nude woman, beautifully famed, apparently alive and who moved her limbs. Her size changed rapidly. Eva took her and placed her on the hands of Mme. Bisson where she remained about ten seconds, long enough for those present to verify that she seemed alive. Comment is needless.

I cannot forbear to mention here the observations on Eva made by certain members of the S. P. R. in January, 1922 — Messrs. Dingwall, Baggalay, Fournit-r d'Albe, Woolley, Feilding, and Whately-Smith; Mrs. Salter and Miss Newton.

Elaborate precautions, quite justifiably minute, were taken against the possibility of trickery.

The official reports of the seances lead to very distinct inferences; it seems that though the external conditions were unfavourable to success, some results were very clear and that it is impossible to refer the phenomena to fraud.

Ncvertheleti our learned colleagues of the S. P. R. come to no conclusion. They admit that the only possible trickery is regurgitation. But what is meant by that? How can masses of mobile substance, organized as hands, faces, and drawings, be made to emerge from the oesophagus or the stomach? No physiologist would admit such power to contract those organs at will in this manner. How, when the medium's hands are tied and held, could papers be unfolded, put away, and made to pass through a veil?

The members of the S. P. R., when they fail to understand, say, "It is difficult to understand how this is produced." Mr. Dingwall, who is an expert in legerdemain, having seen the ectoplasm emerge as a miniature hand, making signs before disappearing, says, "I attach no importance to this." We may be permitted to remark that very great importance attaches to Mr. Dingwall's testimony. The general conclusion is that there was probably no trickery, but the phenomena were not sufficient to warrant acceptance.

Certainly every experimenter has the right to be very exacting as to proof, but it is impossible not to be astonished at the glaring contradiction between the reports of these seances and the inferences drawn from them. However, we willingly concede to the London experimentalists that for such surprising phenomena it is adv isable not to rest on past experiments, but to repeat them; there is all to gain and nothing to lose by increased rigour and frequency of experiment

M. Guy du Bourg de Bozas reports (Revue Mctafsychtijue, No. i, 1921) an interesting variation in ectoplasmic experiments. With three different mediums, in Paris, Copenhagen, and Warsaw, he has found that electric connection could be established between two electrodes. Electrical resistance being easily measured, the new method may be expected to be very useful (second French edition).

There is in Warsaw a professional medium called Burgik. He is a man of about forty-five, thin, undersized, and seems in indifferent health. He gives many seances and seems not to be at all interested in the phenomena, which appear to be quite independent of his will. I had eight to ten seances with him. He is quite motionless during the experiments, and his left hand was held by me, the right being held by some other person. Lights, sometimes very bright, appear and move about like will-o'-the-wisps, close to our faces and moving about the room up to the ceiling.

In (he last seance that I had with him the phenomena were very marked. I held his left hand and M. de Gielski his right. He was quite motionless, and none of the experimenters moved at all. My trouser leg was strongly pulled and a strange, ill-defined form that seemed to have paws like those of a dog or small monkey climbed on my knee. I could feel its weight, very light, and something like the muzzle of an animal (?) touched my cheek. It was moist and made a grunting noise like a thirsty dog. Later on two strong hands seized my two shoulders; and very bright lights came round a face. No trickery seems possible, but it must be remembered that we were dealing with a professional medium.

This medium ought not to be left to develop in unscientific, mystical, and credulous circles. All such half-experiments are valueless from a scientific point of view.

Further experiments were made with Kluski, resulting in fresh paraffin moulds which prove conclusively that the "gloves" of paraffin wax were obtained during the seance, that these were of a living hand showing the texture of the skin, the veins, and the creases of the skin, and that a normal hand could not have released itself from the glove.

These were the conclusions of practised moulders, called in as experts, They say, "We cannot understand how these paraffin moulds could have been obtained; it is an absolute mystery to us." This mystery is dematerialization, a correlative of the materialization. The whole of this investigation made by Gclcy with minute care is of the highest importance, for it gives irrefragable scientific demonstration of ectoplasmic materialization (second French edition).



Chapter IV. Levitations

Ectoplasms and telekinesis are proven phenomena, and with these must be linked the still uncertain facts of levitation.

This is an exceptional occurrence, even with powerful mediums. The word is not defined in Littre's dictionary; it is a partial or total raising of the body without any apparent mechanical muscular action, whether the body remains for some time suspended in the air, or whether it merely rises for a moment to a certain height.

Many such levitations are mentioned in the Lives of the Saints; and I do not know that this phenomenon, so frequently related in legend, can always be controverted.

Many cases are related in (iorre's Mystique Divine1 (transl. Paris, 1894, ii, 291). He cites St. Peter of Alcantara, the admirable Christine. Agnes of Bohemia, Bernard de Courleon, Dalma-Ctttl ol GtfOQOe, St. Frauds of Assisi, and more especially St. Joseph de Copertina AbW Kil>et also cites numerous cases — St. Paul de la Croix, St. Theresa, St. Philip de Neri, Dominique San Diego (whose levitation is shown in a picture by Murillo at the Louvre), Salvator de Horta, and others.

More recently, religious books affirm the same of A. H. Fourm (1752-1834), of Claude Dhiere (1757-1820), and of the Cure d'Ars, Jean B. \ ianney (1786-1859). Reproductions of pictures representing these will be found in De Rochas's book and. /. V PH 1901, xi, 17-47.

I will allude, and that but briefly, only to the levitations of Joseph of Copertino. It cannot be supposed that all that has been Hid of him is entirely false; for there is plenty of documentary tfifttifflOOy, and not of remote date, for he was born in 1603 and died in 1663. Fifteen years after his death Father Nuti of Assisi wrote his life, employing the testimony of many witnesses. Three

*Lo Mystique Divine, Paris, Poussielgue, i88j; quoted by De Rochas in an admirable little book, wise and erudite: Recueils de documents relatifs a la IH itation du corps humam. Paris, Lcymarie, 1897.

successive investigations, in 1711. 1722, and 1753, were made by successive popes prior to his beatification, and a life of St. Joseph was published in 1753, only a century and a half ago, and in this book alone the facts are attested by a sufficient number of witnesses.

From all these documents it appears that he was often lifted from the earth, sometimes remaining suspended in the air in presence of all the brothers of his order. The monks round him, doubting what they saw, passed their hands under his feet to be sure that they were not touching the ground. Pope Urban VIII witnessed this levitation, as also Duke Frederic of Brunswick in 1650. It would seem that in some exceptional cases St. Joseph could raise into the air those who had come to see him.

Gorres gives no less than twelve pages to these levitations of St. Joseph, and says that each was preceded by a kind of ecstasy which began by a cry, I)h! Oh! repeated several times, and that the holy man was seized with trembling followed by a period of stupor.

In the official report of proceedings "to deliver a girl possessed by the evil spirit" at Louviers in 1591, Franchise Fontaine, a young servant of Louviers, being on her knees, was "fearsomely raised," and another time was raised from the earth higher than the altar. A third time she was raised over a bench in front of the altar and carried through the air, head downwards. The priest Fillet who was exorcising Franchise showed much discernment! He considered that she was raised by her hair, and had her head shaved, which forthwith put an end to the levitations (??)

No account can be taken of this old document, nor of those referring to the possessed persons of Langres (1734). The credulity of exorcists is sometimes unimaginable, and we must assume provisionally that all these formal attestations are only illusions. Therefore though we cannot absolutely deny all these stories, they cannot convince.

A. de Rochas mentions some instances of levitations observed in the nineteenth century by various experimenters who were certainly credulous but also men of good faith — the magnetizer Lafontaine. Dr. Cyriax of Berlin, Mr. B., a friend of De Rochas, a student at the Polytechnic; M. Paluzzi of Naples; Monseigneur d'Hulst; Dr. Schmidt of Vienna; and Justinus Kerner, with the Scctm ol Prevorst. He says with justice, "The history of science is there to remind us that each generation has seen crumble down the greater part of the scaffolding of knowledge of which the previous generation was assured/'

Although levitations cannot be placed among demonstrated facts, they certainly merit attentive examination. In fact, levitation is only a special case of telekinesis — an unknown mechanical action on matter. Only if it is mechanical, the fulcrum of the power is not apparent.

Semi-levitations must be distinguished from total levitations. In the former the body of the medium loses weight, or, almost without muscular help, it is placed on a table. It is difficult to verify the conditions, especially if the phenomenon takes place in the dark: in that case even testimony proves little; for a medium, even if not acrobatic, could quite well persuade credulous sitters that it had taken place by supernatural powers. There is no need to make much of such semi-levitations as were given by Carancini.

According to Kerner, when the Seeress of Prevorst was put into a bath during her trances she floated on the top of the water like a cork. It is a pity that such stuff should be mingled with serious enquiries; they detract from them.

Eglinton at a memorable seance in presence of the Emperor and Empress of Russia, the Grand Duke of Oldenburg, the Grand Duke Vladimir, and other members of the Imperial family, rose into the air. "My neighbours," says Eglinton, "had to stand on their chairs to follow me. I continued to rise till my feet touched two shoulders on which I leaned; they were those of the Czar."

Florence Cook relates that when fourteen years old she was raised up to the ceiling, to her great alarm. This was at one of her first spiritualist seances. She was carried above the heads of the sitters and deposited on a table.

Abbe Petit, writing to De Rochas, said that he was once lifted in a church; he resisted and his terror was such that he was ill afterwards. But he brings forward no witness, so the thing was doubtless an illusion.

Dr. Nicolas Santangelo, of Yenosa, on giving his hand to two mediums. Ruggieri and Cecchini, was lifted into the air by Ruggieri. "Feeling the ground fail under my feet, I clung to the arm of Ruggieri, and was raised to a height of about three yards; so that I distinctly tVIt the chandelier with my feet. On descending, and light being restored, I found myself kneeling on the table."

All dtafl Itaffa are highly doubtful. Some others, here following, seem to deserve more credence.

Dr. L. Luciani, professor of physiology in the University of Rome, relates that at a seance with Eusapia, he holding one hand, and M. E. Nathan, Mayor of Rome, holding the other, she said that she was rising into the air. "We felt a movement of ascent that we followed without aiding it. Light was restored and Eusapia was sitting in her chair, both of its front feet being on the table" (A. S. P., 1906, xvi, 653).

Dr. L. Patrizi, also a professor of physiology, studied the levitations of the medium, A. Zuccarino, and gave some interesting photographs (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 528-549). Zuccarino is a young man of about twenty-two, a government employee, and therefore not a professional medium. The phenomenon peculiar to him is a very distinct levitation that lasts for about ten seconds. He holds the hands of the sitters who link hands round him, but in place of leaning on their hands he tends to take them higher. During the trance necessary for levitation he claims to be helped by his guides. He produces also some luminous phenomena.

Despite the authority of Professors Luciani and Patrizi, the levitations of Eusapia and Zuccarino have been questioned; but I am not prepared decidedly to deny what two distinguished physiologists attest.

Stainton Moses had levitations, which he describes as follows: "On August 30, 1872, I felt my chair twist round from the table to be raised from the floor to a height that I estimate as twelve to fourteen inches. My feet were about twelve inches from the floor. The chair remained suspended for a few moments and I then felt myself lifted higher and higher by a slow, steady movement. I felt no fear or uneasiness. I was perfectly conscious of what was happening and described the phenomena to those who were seated round the table. The movement lasted a considerable time. I was facing the wall and marked it at the level of my chest with a pencil. This mark was about six feet above the floor. I was not troubled, I seemed to be in a lift and the things round me to be lowered below me." 1

Stainton Moses describes other particulars as to his levitations. Sometimes he was transported from his chair to a sofa at a considerable distance, and very quickly. Once he was raised so high that his feet touched the head of one of the sitters, he then being in a recumbent posture. On that day, after the levitation, a stool

^Researches on spiritualism during the years 1872-3. by M. A. Oxon (pseudonym of Stainton Moses) cited by Fr. Myers, P. S. P. /?., xi, 1894.

was taken from one corner of the room and knocked against a chair near the door.

But Stainton Moses disliked physical phenomena; why, is not very clear ("I discouraged them as much as possible, from a dislike to violent physical manifestations"), so that they occurred no more.

Eusapia showed only partial levitations. Morselli says, "Rarlssinto fenomcno, certamcntc sitteero net suo initio, forsc illusorio p0f nostra nclla sua continuazione acrca al di sopra del tavolo tncdiummco."

At Milan I saw a weighing machine on which Eusapia was seated lose weight slowly by about sixteen pounds from one hundred and sixteen pounds to one hundred pounds; but I do not think this very evidential, for it is difficult to read a Roman balance correal;., lad in the- dim Bgbfl perhaps full precautions hfld not been taken to ensure that one of Eusapia's feet was not touching the ground.

Morselli gives one instance in detail from which it would certainly appear that Eusapia was raised in her chair to a height of thirty-two inches as if by an external power. Porro, Morselli, and De Albertis were iritMSM to this. They passed their hands between the table and Eusapia's feet, which were over the table. The movement took place rapidly and smoothly in a few seconds, and the descent was gradual. Xevertlu U >s as it took place in almost total darkness, it is difficult to be sure.

Homo's levitations are the most extraordinary of any; they have often been described.

"Mr. Home announced to us that he was about to be lifted into the air. A moment later he passed over the table above the heads of those present. I begged him to make a mark on the ceiling with a pencil. As he had none, I got up to lend him mine and only at my utmost reach could I come at his hand which was quite Nmn feet from the ground. I put the pencil into his hand which kept hold of mine, I accommodating myself to his aerial peregrinations" (Some hu uloits m My Life, by D. D. Home. Account by Mr. James Watson, solicitor, of Liverpool).

The following account, by the editor of the CornhUl Magazine, i> Granger still: "By the faint light in the room I saw Home's head indistinctly; some minutes later his voice seemed to come from above: he then said that he would pass before the window and against its pale light we could see the opaque form of his body sil-

houetted. We saw him right across the window in a horizontal posture, feet first. He floated in the air for several minutes and I felt his feet touch my hair. He went as high as the ceiling on which he made a slight mark; after which he descended and resumed his place among us" (loc. cit.. p. 224).

These strange facts, whether related of St. Joseph, Stainton Moses, or Home deserve to be borne in mind; but despite the number and the authority of the witnesses, it seems to me that rigid science cannot yet consider levitation as a proven fact.

To admit a fact as scientifically demonstrated, no less positive proof should be required as would justify a death-sentence on a man.

The future will perhaps remove our doubts.

This hesitation, which will perhaps appear overcautious to some persons, should give weight to our absolute affirmation of telekinesis and ectoplasms as genuine metapsychic phenomena. Telekinesis is a proven fact. Ectoplasms are demonstrated. It would, however, be illogical to regard these various phenomena, despite their obvious kinship, as so intimately connected that affirmation or denial of any should involve the affirmation or denial of others.



Chapter V. Bilocations



(a) Objective Bilocations

Just as lcvitation is connected with telekinesis, so bilocation ers on ectoplasmic appearances. It is vaguely admitted by popular opinion, but is very far from being a demonstrated fact. It will even be seen that there are grave reasons for doubting it and not even one sound proof in its support.

Bilocation signifies the simultaneous presence of an individual in two different places, near together or far apart. Those who believe in it say that the "double" of the person is seen, so that the study of bilocations is also the study of "doubles."

So for other phenomena, a distinction must be made here also between the subjective and the objective.

Bilocation would be objective if there were really a duplicated living bodv showing material reality simultaneously in two different places. Such objective bilocations are as yet only fantastical legends.

Bilocation is subjective when the form of an individual appears with all the attributes of life to some sensitive at a distance from where the person actually is. This will readily be perceived to be one of the modalities of CIJ ] te-thesia, and stories of objective bilocations cannot be given a place in objective metapsychies. The reality of the subjective bilocations in no way implies the reality of objective bilocations.

In the Lives of the Saints there are many instances of objective bilocations, all very questionable; it would be unreasonable to give them any scientific weight.

The best known case is that of Alphonse de Liguori who, on the 17th of September, 1774, remained quiet and dumb in his cell at Arezzo, taking no nourishment and speaking to no one. On the morning of the 22d he awoke, and said that he had been at the bedside of the dying Pope. It seems that on the night of the 21st of September Pope Clement XIV died at Rome attended by Alphonse de Liguori.

It is narrated also of St. Francis Xavier that in a shipwreck

55» in the China seas he was seen simultaneously on board and in a boat with several sailors. Similar stories are told of St. Joseph of Copertino, St. Marie d'Agreda, and others.

Contemporaneous facts are no more definite than these legendary histories. Here is one that seems to me painfully inconclusive, despite the authority of W. T. Stead.1

In 1895, in a London church, William Stead saw one of his friends, Mrs. A. Now, Stead knew the lady, who lived in Bayswater, to be very ill, and was alarmed at her imprudence. Stead recognized her clearly; he had time to look in her face and to see all her features. His two sons and Mrs. Stead also recognized Mrs. A. In reality Mrs. A. had not left Rayswater.

This observation is completely nullified by the fact that a lady in black with a large hat, seen in church, might very well be a living person quite different from Mrs. A. A mistake by Stead and his two sons is a thousand times more probable than the presence of Mrs. A.'s phantom moving and acting for over an hour before a hundred persons.

Among the stories of doubles, one of the most astonishing (though unproven), is that told by R. Dale Owen about a century ago. R. Bruce, a Scotsman, second officer on a ship going to Newfoundland, was uncertain of his course. He went to the captain's cabin and there saw an unknown man. writing. Bruce returned to the bridge where he found the captain, and they both returned to the cabin. No one was there, but they found a paper with the words, "Steer north-west." The counsel so strangely given was followed, and after some hours they fell in with a el in distress on board of which was a man identified by the second officer as the man he had seen in the captain's cabin (Footfalls on the Boundary of Another World, p. 242).

However curious this instance of wireless telegraphy so strangely supplemented, it is Axibtfld whether this story of Bruce can be transferred from the realm of romance to that of science.

The next case is considered important by Aksakoff, though it rests on a single witness. Mme. de Guldenstubh£. It also dates from far back, so that the phenomenon at least is very questionable, to say no more.

iDelanne, Les apparitions moterialisies, i, 266. Sec also Stead, The experience of a double, Borderland, 1894. i. 7-**-

The story is of a Mile. Sagee, a French schoolmistress in Livonia. Mine, df Guldenstubbe was then thirteen years old and was one of the pupils at the school. It seems that the pupils sometimes saw two Mile. Sagees side by side exactly resembling each other and making the same gestures.

Other stories are told of Mile. Sagee's bilocations, on which I shall not dilate, for I do not believe them. The phenomena are said to have lasted about eighteen months, but their duration is of no importance and it seems to me impossible to take them seriously.

No better instance of the subjective nature of bilocations can be given than the narrative of F. Hartmann, cited by Bozzano (Luce e Ombra, xi, 1911, 180). This, like all Bozzano's writing, deserves to be thought over, even though objective bilocations seem to me quite unsupported by reliable evidence.

The story is of a German lieutenant who was about to get into his bed, when he suddenly saw himself there. He walked about in the room, took a book and tried to read, but could not turn over the pages; he wished to go into the next room, and suddenly found himself there, where he saw one of his comrades. He tried to speak to this man, to shake him and to breathe on him, but to his astonishment this man did not answer. He then wished to go to the railway station, found himself in a tunnel that he did not know, and finally returned to his room where he saw his body shaken by the servant w ho had found his master nearly lifeless.1 The evidence would show that the whole thing was a dream.

In the chapter on Monition^ there are various cases of the appearing of doubles. These are interesting as monitions but not as doubles, for there is no proof of any objectification of the person appearing. It is most frequently an objectification of an idea, in Plato's sense of the word, some knowledge of an external fact having reached the percipient b\ crvptesthesia, and being then presented under the symbolic form of an idea (image) in Plato's sense of the word. There is, in fine, only an impression made on the percipient which he objectifies as an internal phantom. Unless in the case of collective perception of a double, the only phenomenon that can be admitted as genuine is the impres>ion perceived by the sensitive; and this is no true or material bilocation.

'In Chapter III ante (p. iij) the term "external autoscopy" has been applied to vition of oneself or of the double as in the classical case of Goethe; but the word is also used for the vision that certain somnambulists have of their internal organs.

The monitions of approaching death announced hy bilocations are not premonitions, there being no announcement of the impending event. A hallucinaton vision occurs without any concomitant announcement. What are we to infer from a hallucinatory vision that reveals nothing? Probably there is some relation of cause and effect, since the individual has had an hallucination doubtless for the first time in his life, and that this is an indication of approaching death even though death is not announced.

The following case is one of this type, interesting because it Ml the personal observation on himself by a distinguished man of science, the zoologist Romanes.

Mr. Romanes, at the moment of waking, the night being ended, saw a veiled form pass in front of his bed. It raised its hands to show its face and Romanes recognized his sister, whom he knew to be slightly ill. Very shortly after this vision the trial ldj developed quickly, became very serious, and she died not long after.

Numerous facts of this kind have been collected by Bozzano.1

Usually the phantom more or less resembles a double of the person whose death is near; but such facts always leave room for doubt as to their objecti\ it v. except in cases when the hallucination is collective, as in the case of Mine. Isnard of the Rue Jacob.

Mine. Chaproniere had a maid. Mine. Gregory, in her service forty OM years. One night as Gregory was undressing Mme. Chaproniere, her double appeared. "What!" said Mme. Chap roniere, "I see your double!" Mine. Gregory was in no way disturbed. Three days later she had a slight indisposition which soon became serious and she died just eight days after her double had been seen, at the same hour (P. S. P. /?., xi, 448).

Myers cites some similar cases.

There are a certain number of such cases which it is difficult to classify; they are not premonitions, since the phantom makes no announcement, and when entirely subjective they may be considered mere hallucinations without connection with any external event, so that they are neither veridical nor symbolical.

To all seeming, these visions of doubles are only cases of premonitory cryptesthe-ia The cloudy forms sometimes seen at death-beds as if an astral body were emerging from the material

^Considerations sur les phtnomhies de Mocation, A. S. P., 101 1, xxi. 65-71, 109-116, U3 >5»

body arc probably not mere hallux

In point of fact:

(1) Pathological, non-veridical hallucinations are extremely rare with normal persons who are neither alcoholics nor insane; (2) in not a few cases such visions are collective, excluding the notion of mere hallucination; and (3) veridical hallucinations whose reality as monitions has been fully established, are in all respects similar to these apparitions of doubles.

These, however, are but inferences. We shall not, therefore, class premonitions of death by the apparition of a double, without any intimation of date or place, among the well-established facts of metapsychics.

Mrs. Shagren was arranging her hair before the glass at ten o'clock In the morning, when a form resembling Mr. Hendrickson approached her as if to put a hand on her shoulder. She turned, and said, "Is that you?" but the phantom vanished. She saw it again in her room on the same day. Mr. Hendrickson, whom Mrs. Shagren knew to be very ill, died some days later. On the day that Mrs. Shagren thought she saw him, he had dreamed that he visited her.

There are still more complex and disturbing cases which must not be rejected on the fallacious pretext that they do not happen to fit some particular theory.

The phantom of Mrs. Hawkins was seen by four persons — her two cousins, her nurse, and her son, at intervals more or less considerable; in the first case by two persons at the same time, whose version is identically the same (Myers, Human Personality,

Two sisters playing the organ in a church both see the phantom of a third sister who had intended to come but had not done so. She appeared in the dress she was wearing and holding a roll of paper which in fact she had in her hand at the time.

In Mrs. Hall's case her own phantom appeared to her, to her husband, and two of her relations as they sat at table.

Frances Reddell, sitting by the bedside of a friend who was seriously ill, saw the phantom of the mother of the sick woman (whom she did not know), but whom she described so exactly that when this lady arrived somewhat later she was recognized by those to whom Frances had spoken. Miss Reddell even described the night-dress and candlestick; confirmed by the parents of the sick girl.

In some cases the bilocation would seem to have been volun-

p. 230).

tary, an effort having been made by A to appear to B. Facts of this kind are few and they are difficult to interpret. In some cases this apparition of the double is seen by several person's at once so that the bilocation is not entirely subjective.

Mr. A. B. manifested to the two Misses Verity, iged twentyfive and eleven. The evidence, verified with extreme care by Myers and Gurney, seems to establish this case as genuine (Delanne, i, 25).

Aksakoff (Animismc el Spiritisme, p. 316) quotes the case of Mr. Benning, a clergyman and a member of a circle at Troy (U. S. A.). Mr. Benning, being unable to come to a stance, wrote a letter excusing himself; but taring that his letter would not arrive in time, he had the curious notion of manifesting (astrally) to the members of the circle. He was seen by several. Two persons not only saw and recognized him — (this is the doubtful point, for there is probably a mistaken identity) — but even touched him, and the phantom seems to have shown sufficient vigour to put one aside and to push the other so strongly as nearly to cause him to fall on the stairs. This extraordinary narrative is lacking in the needful attestations, and must therefore be held very doubtful, to say the least.

The case of the Rev. C. Godfrey is rather better authenticated.

On November 15th, Mr. Godfrey wished to verify personally the fact stated in Phantasms of the Living, that in certain exceptional cases a living person could appear to a sensitive. He accordingly sought to appear to Mrs. X. His watch showed 3.40 a.m. Mrs. X. wrote to him on the morning of the 16th of November, 1886: "A little after half-past three I awoke suddenly, feeling uneasy.... I lit a candle and went downstairs, then returned to my room, where I saw Mr. Godfrey standing before the window. He wore his usual dress. I raised the candle, looked at him for three or four seconds, and he disappeared."

Mr. Kirk, having made several attempts to appear to Miss G., succeeded on one occasion. The apparition was so distinct that Miss G. could distinguish every detail of his dress. Mr. Kirk, however, was seen in miniature, a fact which shows that the vision was entirelv subjective (Delanne. Apparitions materialist es, p. 206).

A. de Rochas quotes the case of Alma Haemmerle, who saw the phantoms of two of her friends, Stankevitch and Serboff, who had tried to appear to herself and her father: both she and her father saw the doubles of the two men. This collective vision makes the hypothesis of the purely subjective nature of the phenomenon rather difficult to accept.

Moreover, as has previously been said, the transition between objective and subjective is gradual; in a certain sense all are objective, for in order to produce a veridical hallucination there must be some kind of exterior cause or molecular vibration that starts the cryptesthetic emotion. We must, however, conclude that the phenomenon is subjective in the ordinary sense of the word, for the unknown mechanical vibrations that produce the hallucination do not resemble ordinary mechanical molecular vibrations.

It would be very useful to be able to discriminate more or less accurately between what is objective and what is not. A visual phenomenon might be termed subjective when it does not or would not affect a photographic plate. But as this test can very seldom be applied, a more practical criterion must be found j and we shall call a phenomenon objective only when all the persons present receive the same sensorial impression.

And yet there are grades of objectivity; for when two sensitives think that they see the same phantom there must be some kind of objectivity, even though the phantom might not impress a photographic plate.

If, however, several persons see the same apparition at the same time; if cats and dogs show fear; if, above all, objects are displaced, it is then impossible to deny objectivity in the usual sense of the word. Several cases have been given in the chapter on collective hallucinations.

In support of the reality of bilocation, photographs showing two images, one sharp and distinct, the other nebulous, have often been appealed to; but trickery in photographs is so childishly easy that no importance can be attached to them. Even if the good faith of the photographer is certain, a slip of the camera or a momentary inattention is enough to give two images on the plate. As a novice in photography I often find doubles on my negatives, but this does not cause me any emotion; they are only photographic blunders. To infer a materialized apparition, just because of a second image on a negative, is to show complete absence of critical faculty.

The photographs of doubles as given in the works of Delanne, A. dc Rochas. of Commandant Darget and Aksakoff seem to me anything but conclusive. I would not even accept that observed by my eminent colleague and friend, Istrati (Delanne, 407). In 1893 he made an effort to appear through the camera of Mr. Hasden, director of instruction at Bucharest, and in fact, at a distance of 180 miles, a small figure did appear on a fresh plate developed by Mr. Hasden.1 The doubtful point is that the little figure is too indistinct to permit of sure recognition.

It is hard to find any experimental defect in the photograph taken by Ochorowicz, though it occasioned a controversy with G. de Fontenay. That taken by Captain Vbtpi i> not evidential.

We must finally conclude that there are not as yet any authentic and unexceptionable instances of objective bilocation and that entirely fresh investigations are required.



(b) Monitions of Approach

There are certain very common cases of monitions or premonitions accompanied by subjective bilocations that are difficult to classify. They are connected with that common occurrence alluded to in the proverbs of all nations — Quand on parte du loup, on en voit la queue — speak of the devil and he will appear — Quando si parla del sole, il sole spunta. Probably all the persons who read these lines have had some sort of warning of this nature. The facts arc numerous enough to require a special name. Myers calls them Monitions of Approach and the name seems worth retention.1

On this subject I will first adduce a fact personally experienced. It is not more evidential than many others, but was minutely scrutinized by myself, my attention having been long given to facts of the kind.

In 188 — I was in the habit of going to No. Ill boulevard St. Germain to the office of the Reive ScientiHque, of which I was the editor, every Wednesday morning. One day, about 9 a.m. while on the right sidewalk, I saw on the left sidewalk Professor Lacassagne of Lyons, who had written an article for the Revue three months before, and I thought — M. Lacassagne has come to Paris and he will come to see me. I knew hirn only

•This photograph may be seen in Baraduc's book, //dmr Humome, Pari*, 1806. Fig. xxiva.

•See also G. C Ferrari, Provision ou premonition 6 tappet (A. S. P., 1005, xv, 385). and Dr. Roch, Note sur les previsions de rencontre, Arch, de Psychol., Geneva. 1905. v, 149. Dr. Roch five* statistics, but on tan cases only, and draws no positive conclusion.

slightly and our relations were distant. At 10 o'clock, after I had interviewed several persons, his card was brought to me at which I was not surprised, having seen him as above mentioned. But as soon as I saw him at the door, 1 was aware that it was not he

whom I had seen, and I asked him, "Were you on the boulevard St. Germain at 9 this morning?" he replied, "Certainly not. I was there at 7, and 1 came here direct from the Val-de-Grace." So I had thought (1) that I had clearly seen him; (2) I had no reason to think that he was in Paris, and (3) it was not he that I saw.

However curious this fact of lucidity, no scientific inference can be drawn from it, for it may well have chanced that some person vaguely resembling him had passed at that time and thus aroused a reminiscence of him in my mind.

But I do not think it was chance; I would rather attribute it to a vague and passing cryptesthesia. If so, does the cryptesthesia refer to the past or to the future? Was it because he had passed that way or because he was going to do so two hours later?

Such cases are innumerable, and if I quote this one it is because I have thought long over it and can find no reasonable solution.

Among the facts of this kind narrated by Myers, I will quote some that seem to me important.

Mr. Carroll sees in his room at Towcester the image of his brother who lived in London. He was frightened, but before he could recover himself, he heard a knock at his door. This time it was really his brother who had come unannounced from London to see him. It should be added that his brother was not sure of the house and had knocked on the chance of being right.

Mr. Stevenson was sitting at home, by his wife, at seven in the evening. All was quiet when he suddenly heard the words, "David has come.,, He thought his wife had spoken and asked her, but she denied having said anything. Now David, his brother, usually MM in at 10 p.m. Three minutes after having heard this voice quite clearly, the door opened and David came in.

Mrs. A. was waiting for her husband who had been out to an Indian village, and being uneasy, went with her younger sister to meet him. At 6 p.m. they saw him driving up in a carriage drawn by his grey horse. Suddenly nothing was visible, but an hour and a half later he drove up with his grey horse.

In Human Personality, Myers gives (p. 229) the instance of Colonel Bigge who saw one of his colleagues in fishing costume and with an outfit of which Colonel Bigge bad no knowledge whatever, ten minutes before this colleague appeared at the place, This is simply a case of cryptotl possibly premonitory; it would be absurd to imagine bilocation.

Mrs. Munro had invited Dr. Jackson for a visit j but ho bad refused. At 2 a.m. one morning she awoke, hearing Dr. Jackson calling at the wicket gate three hundred yards distant. Under ordinary conditions no call would be heard, there being be. t tervening. Hut Mr>. Munro beard, and railed her bu-band. who at first thought the matter an illusion. Hut Dr. Jackson arrived a few minutes later. It is unlikely that this was a monition of approach, and a double is more unlikely still; it was probably a case of auditive hyperesthesia during sleep.

The monitions of approach rarely take an auditive form as in the case of Mr. Saunders, an old and very deaf man of 84, who, on January 8th, at 7.30, heard a voice saying, 'Tom will arrive today." Tom was a soldier in France during the war, and the day before a letter had been received from him saying he would write again. Some hours after this auditive monition Tom arrived (/. 5. P. /?., 1919, xix, 30-32).

The following is an unpublished monition of approach, very interesting, for it was accurately observed by Stella in her own case.

In the little town of S., she was going with her brother for a run in an automobile, and being late they hurried to the place where it was to be waiting. Suddenly Stella saw, in front and approaching them, their friend ()livier who was to meet them at the same place. Stella said to her brother, "Here is Olivier," and made a gesture of recognition with the cane she had in her hand j but her brother could see nothing. At the very moment that the vision disappeared, Olivier himself came up behind them and touched Stella's brother on the shoulder. Stella and her brother were vastly surprised; for they had not suspected his presence, and as they were late they thought to find him already at the meeting-place. They had not looked behind them once when coming up the street, as Olivier immediately asked them; and he also is quite sure that they did not turn h>und once. Therefore they could not have seen him directly.

But even if Stella by indirect vision could have seen Olivier approaching (though this is unlikely) such vision must have been subconscious. In such an event this subconscious vision would have been symbolized by a veridical hallucination, which would be instructive on the theory of symbolization; for Stella had seen I)hvier in front of her. just as if alive; so much so that she had saluted him with her cane.

I think, however, that she had caught no indirect glimpse of him and that this is an excellent instance of monition of approach; the cryptesthetic notion being interpreted by a visual hallucination, which, moreover, was entirely subjective, since her brother saw nothing when she said, "Here is Olivier."

Cases of auditive or visual hallucination announcing the approach are rare, but illusion of the approach is quite common. It would be valuable for metapsychic science if someone would take the trouble to collect some kind of statistics of these happenings, but this would not be an easy matter; on the contrary, it would need a real scientific training and scrupulous exactitude. Cases in which the meeting with a particular person had been foreseen should be entered in a note-book, and only the cases so noted taken account of.

The difficulty, one not easily avoided, would be that unfortunately one is tempted to take into account only the cases in which the anticipation has been verified and to neglect the others.

These approaches are usually manifested as illusions. Some j>erson is seen, and we say, "Here comes A.," A. not having been seen for a long while and his presence being unlikely. But soon one perceives that it is not A. who has been seen, but some one who is like him (or even who is not like him, which is strange enough); and a few steps farther on A. is seen in flesh and blood. Statistics on monitions of approach, both those with positive and those with negative results, would certainly lead to curious conclusions; but the records we have on the subject are imperfect and sparse.

Whatever the cause may be, instances such as those named above show the reality of cryptesthetic monitions of approach; but every reservation must be maintained on the objectivity of bilocations, and though the mystery is profound we shall hold them as non-objective.

Various theories might be evolved, but with our present data it is better to abstain. All that has been said al>out odic perceptions, astral radiation, human effluvia, and the like are so vague and unsatisfactory that it is much wiser to avow our total ignorance.



Chapter VI. Hauntings



1. On Hauntings in General

If traditions and superstitions could be appealed to, the haunting of certain dwellings would be one of the most certain facts of metapsychics; for in all countries and in all times, without exception, these phenomena have been recognized by popular opinion.1

Without attaching any weight to this popular unanimity, it can hardly be supposed that at the hack of all these stories there is not some vestige, however slight and obscure, of truth. It would therefore be almost as absurd to reject without examination all

'The bibliography of ancient cases is enormous. Joseph Glanvil (Saductsmus Trtumphatus, 1700) considered, even then, that poltergeist phenomena — otherwise "haunted houses"— could not be accounted for by fraud or hallucination. Petrus Thyraeus: De mfestis ob molcstantcs dtrmoniorum et defunctorum spirit us locis. Cologne, 1508. Dale Osrcn. Footfalls on the Boundary of Another World, London, i860. Zingaropoli: Gesta di uno spinto ncl monastcro dei PP. Gerolommi in Sopot*. Cronaca del secolo xvii, with preface by E. Passaro; Suite manifestasioni spontant misteriose, Napoli, Detken, 1904.

More modern works will be indicated in the course of this chapter. I mention below, just by way of curiosity, the towns in which there have been apparitions and alleged hauntings, according to Passaro:

Great Britain: Woodstock (1640); Tedworth (1661): Epworth (1716); Lessinghall (1679); Liverpool (1868); B. (Eosa) (1862); Manchester Oooa); Beverley (1903); Guernsey (1903)

France: Lyons (1528); Cideville (1850); Paris (1846); Saint-Qucntin (1849); Algiers (187O; Valence-en- Brie (1897); Brussels (1890); Grivegnce (Belgium) (1900); Bordeaux (1867); Nice (1858).

Italy: Naples (1696); Lanzo (1762); Florence (1867); Bologna (1591); Vicenza (1875); Malta (1700); Genoa (1865); Pavia, Modena (1875); Rome O876 and 1881); Trieste (1881); Turin (1903); Catania (1879).

Germany: Hudemuhlen (1584); Dibbelsdorff (176a); Orlach (1831); Wnnsberg (1835); Brrgzabern O85*); Munchoff < 1818); Groeben O718); Schildbach '1533); Berlin (1890); Mulldorff (1749); Cologne (1865); Resau (1809); Billingheim (r8fi7>; Mohthingen (1841V

Other countries: Lipzy (Russia, 1852); Zurich (i860); Mustaja (Russia, 1K70): Silin (Russia. 1888); Riga (Russia. Iffe); Constantinople (1746): Philadelphia (1866); Guayaquil (1871): Rota (Spain, 1870); Petersburg (1002); Budapest (1902); Nienadowka (1898); San Francisco (1899); Slateaborougb (Georgia, 1891); Ceylon (1902).

that has been said on haunted houses, as to accept it all without criticism.

Some men of science who are interested in occult psychics have endeavoured to study the question; but it has been found that all researches conducted in a scientific manner on haunted houses have given very poor results. The facts evaporate under severe and rigorous investigation. This is a reason for doubt, but not for denial. It is not to be supposed that there should be any incompatibility between the phenomena of haunting and scientific verification; so that the lack of scientific evidence is in itself a strong presumption against the reality of the phenomena.

But this is only a presumption, not a certainty. It remains to be seen if the mass of testimony contains sufficient evidence to warrant some of the phenomena being accepted as true. We must limit ourselves to a critical study of the evidence, since unfortunately no experimental analysis of the phenomena is possible. The history of haunted houses contains very little that can properly Ik: called experimental; there are only observations.

Moreover it is difficult to dtatiogPUh hatintings from other metapsychic phenomena S<»M might be classed as hallucinations or collective monitions, some under cryptcsthesia, more often, as telekinesis. All classification is artificial, and as already often said, facts, when they occur. do not trouble themselves about fitting into any particular section of a scientific treatise.

Therefore it is exceedingly difficult to lay down definitions and delimitations of haunting; though the dominant idea seems to be spatial. The phenomena, whether subjective or objective, are of a mixed nature, but they occur in a particular locality and not elsewhere: everything htppeoi as though this localization in space were one of the conditions of the phenomena.

This is obviously an essential fact to be seriously considered. I f the haunting* are genuine, they are localized in some old castle or in some particular room of a house so that we might almost emu-hide that there is some emanation proceeding from inert things in that place; for it would be absurd to think that spirits are chained by terrestrial material links to the places where they apj>ear. I f they come in "the blue room" of a certain house, there must be something in the blue r< iom that retains them or produces them.

This is what Bozzano calls the psychometric hypothesis of infe stations. I should prefer to call it the pragmatic hypothesis; but the Italian word infestaziont seems to mc preferable to haunting.

It seems impossible not to admit this hypothesis, partially, at any rate; for we cannot gratuitously attribute to spirits a fancy never to leave a particular place when they might wander elsewhere.

A provisional definition of haunting or infestation may be given as: Metapsychic phenomena, objective or subjective, produced repeatedly in a given place.

This definition is, however, somewhat defective, as it does not apply to every case. There arc hauntings that seem to attach to persons rather than to places: and movements of objects produced in the neighbourhood of a haunted or "infested" person can scarcely be classed as hauntings. They are phenomena of telekinesis involuntary and non-experimental, and thus differentiated from the experimental telekinesis previously studied in this book. They are not true hauntings under the somewhat arbitrary definition that limits haunting to places.

We shall therefore consider hauntings under two heads; speaking first of houses haunted by phantoms, and then of material phenomena attaching to persons rather than to houses. There would therefore seem to be not only haunted houses but haunted persons; indeed it is probable that many instances of haunted houses really are cases of haunted persons.

Phenomena of haunting which consist of an apparition having well-defined specific characteristics, but seen by one person only at a time and without any movement of objects, are classed as subjective. Objective phenomena are those in which movements of objects and external mechanical action take place.

Even this division is a convention, for the objective and the subjective are frequently intermingled, so that we must follow Bozzano and speak of hauntings that are mainly objective, or mainly subjective."

Having no personal experience to quote. I must rely on those authors who have seriously studied the facts: C. Lombroso, Ricercke tui fenomeni ipnotici # ifirittct. Chapter XII, Case faniomaticke, Turin, 1909. F. Zingaropoli. Case in f estate dagli spiriti, Naples, Soc Partonopea, 1907. P. S. P. R. and /. 5. P. R. passim. The sdrairable itudy by Borrano, Det fenomeni fmfestaixone. Rome, Ed. Luce e Ombra, 1919. should be specially coniultrd I shall borrow much from this striking synthesis, as I have done in the chapter on Pre-

In certain very rare cases the phenomena are entirely subjective, though there is cryptesthesia, and recognition too clear for the fact to be referred to pathological hallucination.

Mrs. O'Donnell (/. S. P. R., viii, 326) goes to Brighton and hires furnished rooms. She docs not sleep in the same room with her daughter. At one o'clock in the morning she hears steps on the floor above so loud that they seem due to a number of people, lasting the whole night. In the morning she says to the landlady, I lie people on the upper floor have no consideration for others," and is answered with some surprise that the upper floor is unoccupied. The following day after the same noisy tramplings Mrs. O'Donnell sees a horrible spectre pointing to the next room. She even feels a cold hand touch her and almost faints with fright. The phantom was that of a small, dark man. Her daughter saw and heard nothing. On the night following the same spectre reappeared though the door was locked.

After enquiry, it was ascertained that some weeks before, the room had been inhabited by a small, dark man who had thrown himself from the window of the next room (Bozzano, p. 77).

1 his is a good instance of subjective cryptesthesia, for the facts were perceived by Mrs. O'Donnell only, ami not by her daughter.

Bozzano describes auditive and visual phenomena as follows (1 give a very free translation, greatly abridged):

"Auditory phenomena consist of noises without any apparent cause, varying from knocks of differing strength to crashes of broken glass and crockery, falling of chairs, doors and windows opening and shutting violently, rolling of heavy bodies and movements of chairs. Often there are footsteps, seemingly human, in the passages and on the stairs, rustling of clothes, despairing cries, sighs, sobs or religious psalmody, songs, and musical sounds.

"It is highly probable that these phenomena, though mingled with objective facts, are mainly subjective; they are, however, often heard by several persons, so that in many well-authenticated cases they are frankly objective.

"Under their visual shape these phenomena appear as luminous manifestations or phantoms. The luminous manifestations may be of undefined shape, or lights by which the phantom is seen. In some very few cases the light is in the hands of the phantom.

"Except for some very exceptional apparitions of animals, phantoms are human, and clothed in the garments of the period of their terrestrial life. Sometimes they seem solid as in life, in other cases they arc transparent and nebulous like shades; usually they seem to enter by a door, proceed to another room, and vanish. They often arise unexpectedly, dissolving into vapour and pa through walls and closed doors. Sometimes they appear to walk, sometimes to be suspended in the air. Usually the period of infestation only lasts for a few years, a few months, or even a few days; hut the haunting is often prolonged over many years, with long intervals.

"The arrival of phantoms is nearly always heralded l»y a vague sensation of horror, the feeling of a presence, coinciding with i cold breath. They seem nearly always wholly indifferent to the living persons present. Sometimes they enact some domestic function, or make despairing gestures. Great differences are observable in their behaviour '

Do these phenomena correspond to an objective reality, or arc they merely hallucinations?

The hypothesis of trickery and fraud must first be eliminate! Out of the 374 cases that BoOMO o n iders worthy of mention there is perhaps not a single one which is attributable to fraud and lying.'

To make our ideas clear, we will imagine I typical case as follows:

A, arriving for the first time at a certain locality, M, sees a phantom, which he docs not recognize, and which he describes. Some days later another person, R, coming to the same place, sees a phantom similar to that seen by A. Further enquiry shows that two or three years previously some individual disappeared under tragic circumstances at M, and his description agrees with what A and B have seen. A and B are l>oth ignorant of the tragic associations of the I: « M. though they may have heard vaguely that it is haunted. At no time in their lives have A or B had hallucinations, they are little disposed to mysticism, and they are persons of well-balanced intelligence.

Such are the usual conditions of subjective hauntings.

It seems improbable that the hallucinations of A and B are devoid of some veridical foundations; for (1) pathological hallucinations in normal persons are extremely rare; (2) the agreement in the hallucinations is strong evidence; (3) there is a correspondence

'It ii different in the case of objective haunting! when object* are thrown about, for gross frauds often occur in these cases, perhaps in most of them.

between the identical hallucinations and the tragic event, and (4) monitions by veridical hallucinations are so frequent that they must be considered scientifically established, and can be applied with slight variations to hallucinations of hatintings; the sequence in both cases being analogous.

If the evidence for the existence of phantoms rested only on the evidence for hauntings, we would certainly be unable to come to any conclusion; for despite the unquestionable veracity of the witnesses, they are neither sufficiently numerous nor is their standing such as to warrant acceptance of the extraordinary and unlikely phenomenon of a materialization. But materializations are abundantly proved from experimental data, and the notion may be applied to phenomena of haunting; for all explanations of these latter, except as a partial or complete materialization, are wiredrawn and scarcely defensible.

Since several persons see practically the same phantom it cannot be considered entirely subjective. In order that Af B, and C should see the same figure. D, there must be some vibration exterior to them that arouses the image D in their brains. Consequently the image originates in an exterior phenomenon and is to that degree objective, though that not objectivity as we generally understand it. When a phantom is seen by three persons only, n n others present seeing and hearing nothing, ancj the photographic plate shows nothing, the pliantom is not objective in the ordinary sense.

In daily life if there is a palm-tree and twenty persons round it they will all see it; and if there were ten thousand they would all sec it. for it is frankly objective; it could be photographed, drawn, described, the wind could he heard in its leaves and the trunk could he touched. But a phenomenon of cryptcsthesia is of a different kin!, for whether it concerns monitions or hauntings, the faculty of cryptesthesia varies enormously in different persons, dealing with cognitions of another order which do not reach the intelligence by the usual channels, and can be perceived only by a sensitive.

An absolutely deaf man would not hear a loud whistle beside him and might deny its objectivity. His negation would not prove that there was no whistle; and similarly the absence «»f sensation among non-sensitives docs not prove that there is no external vibration.

HA I "XI I \'< iS

What arc the external objective phenomena that arouse a veridical hallucination?

The uncertainty here is so absolute that all hypotheses can claim consideration.

A. Is it an impression left on things, an emanation from them?

B. Is it the astral body of a deceased human being?

C. Is it an intelligent but non-human force that comes to notify its presence?

These three hypotheses will now be briefly discussed.

A. It is possible that an effluvium that we do not know proceeds from things. The magnet seems an inert object till a piece of ktm is brought near it; but it reveals great energy in presence of the iron. Similarly apparently inert objects might reveal hidden energies. The ring long worn by an individual might accumulate properties characteristic of the wearer which it had not when it left the jeweller's hands. A dog recognizes his master's glove, for the glove has taken the scent of the hand, imperceptible to our imperfect sense but perceptible to that of the dog. Could there not be mysterious energies stored up in things that may awaken precise images in sensitives? If it were so, the principal cases of haunting might be thus explained; though this is not an explanation, but a verbal expression given to a phenomenon that is not understood.

Bozzano has discussed this "psychometric hypothesis" (which I prefer to call pragmatic) and decides that it is insufficient, giving his reasons for this conclusion. I shall here mention two only, which seem very serious:

Firstly, there are phenomena of infestation in places that have no relation (as far as can be known) with the suicide, murder, or other tragical fact that seems to have originated the haunting.

Secondly, and more especially, because these apparitions seem to show an intention, a purpose, a monition, sometimes a premonition and occasionally have a periodicity characterized by a certain rhythm and in any case show the action of a personality which does not seem to be that of the sensitive, and still less the property of an inert object.

It seems to me puerile to endeavour to penetrate farther, and in short the pragmatic hypothesis is plainly insufficient. Moreover its weakness is apparent in that it is applicable only to subjective facts of haunting, and in no way to the objective facts.

Do the other hypotheses show more likelihood?

B. The phantoms are those of deceased persons: ghosts, rcven> ants, in the textual sense of the word. And at first sight this explanation seems simple.

But what absurdities it involves!

Why those persons only and not others? For millions of tragic events occur continually, everywhere, without causing any haunting whatsoever. Often insignificant causes would seem to have decided the ghost to return. And this ghost seems to have a very curious mentality; he throws stones, breaks bottles, and opens doors with violence. He is frankly inept, and shows an ineptitude that belongs to the animal rather than to the man. Since intelligence has vanished with the brain, and the body has undergone putrefaction, how can the dead man live again, even under a nebulous phantasmal form?

We have already seen that the identity of spirits with such and such a deceased person (which implies human survival) is very difficult to accept, even with such seemingly strong proofs as those in connection with Raymond Lodge and George Pclham. How much weaker and tenuous arc the few proofs of indentity given by ghosts!

C. There remains the third hypothesis that there are spirits (angels or demons) who are intelligent |>owers. entirely different from humanity, able to do anything objectively or subjectively.

This hypothesis is convenient, even much too convenient, for to admit all-powerful and omniscient beings is much the same as to admit our entire ignorance. I prefer to suppose a human energy similar to the ectoplasm coinciding with a certain degree of lucidity, causing such and such forms to appear. But this, too, is unsatisfactory and wire-drawn; even ridiculous. Nevertheless, being unable to see any cause. I would accept this opinion provisionally as a working hypothesis such as one is obliged to use in a dawning science.

As to the character of these forces, if they exist (which is not at all certain). I will not allow myself any hypothesis at all. Most religions admit the existence of evil spirits. The hypothesis of the devil explains everything to some minds. Haunted houses are exorcised. The devil becomes the Deus ex mochina.

Even spiritualists, followers of Allan Kardcc. believe that there are evil spirits, a notion that disposes of all psychological difficulties and contradictions with a word. The discords of the subconscious, the trivialities, the coarse jests, deceiving tor the sake of deceiving, are, according to spiritualists, the work of evil Spirits. Alt the disturbances in haunted houses, according to them, are made by bad spirits. According to certain ecclesiastics it is the devil who makes all the noise.

But all this hypothesis of the devil and evil spirits is really very primitive anthropomorphism.

Even if I were to admit (which I cannot bring myself to do) that there is any intervention by non-human intelligent powers, I should refuse to believe that these share our imperfect notions on good and evil.

I will say no more on these theories, for they are all so feeble, so essentially and necessarily feeble, that we must await new facts and fresh evidence before building on the old. I shall therefore relate as briefly as possible some of the facts of haunting, but I shall not criticize each in detail, preferring to leave them to the reader's own judgment. I shall, however, permit myself a i timid) expression of personal opinion by drawing the inferences that may be deduced from them.



2. On the Hauntings of Houses (Subjective)

Hauntings, properly so called, are those in which an apparition manifests itself in a house said to be infested.

Up to what point is the phenomenon entirely subjective? This is an obscure question to which the facts, poor in quality and few in number, do not permit a decided answer.

An English ecclesiastic1 went with his wife to take up his duties in a new parish, and entered their vicarage, a comfortable house at some distance from the village. They had no servants, a woman came in to do the housework; and in the evening they locked the house up.

During the night they heard great crashes like cannon-shot rolling on the floors, which woke them up and lasted for part of the

•Caae of Bottmoo. Report of the commit!* on Haunted Homes. P. S. P R. March, 1884. p. 144 The members of the committee were: Rev. Butbrll, Hufhet, A. P. Perceval Keep, P. Podmore. Hentleifh Wedfewood. and Ed. R.

rmal. The woman

who came to do their work would not stay a night in the house.

The next evening at 8 p.m. the noises began again; this time human footsteps "walking slowly but firmly." Then, for two weeks, there was nothing. Then the noises began again j knocks, sometimes very loud and quick, sometimes feeble and hesitating.

lie bodies. This went on for a year, and in the end the vicar and his wife left the village.

A friend who came to the house also heard the noises, and as they were perceived both by the vicar and his wife, they must be admitted as objective. Possibly complicity of the servant is not absolutely disproved.

The noises heard by Dr. Kinnaman cannot be considered as proving anything. It is the queer story of a young student named Adams who bequeathed his skeleton to his friend Dr. Kinnaman, on condition that the latter would keep it for his anatomical studies. Some years later, as the skeleton was in the way, it was relegated to a shed; and then such noises and crashes were heard that a better place had to be found for Adams's bones. Adams would then seem to have been satisfied, and kept quiet.

This improbable and amusing tale is more like a comic novel than a real fact.

Miss R. Morton.' a medical student, came in 1882 to live in a house at Gifton. In this house there had been a domestic drama twenty years before. One evening. Miss Morton hearing noises at her door went into the passage and saw a tall lady in a widow's cap and a black woollen dress, holding a handkerchief to her face.

