Bozzano's cases (lvi and lvii) are authenticated by numerous witnesses. They are as follows: On the 22d of April, 1877, the eldest daughter of Mr. Maxfield, a very well-known hotel manager in New York, said to Dr. Anthony (who made a written note of the prophecy), "I have just heard a voice speaking very clearly at my ear: you will die first, then Harry, then your father; and Dr. Anthony will be present on each occasion." The three persons referred to were all in perfect health, but the daughter died on November 9, 1879; Harry on June 22, 1884, and Mr. Maxfield on July 2, 1884. Dr. Anthony was present at the three deaths.

A similar prediction was made by a medium to the eldest daughter of Westland Marston. "You will die first, then Nelly, then Philip, and your mother last." All came to pass exactly.

Mr. Paige went to a medium without giving his name; she told him the name of his wife, Eliza Anne, and of her sister Maria. She described accurately the very serious illness of the former, and predicted that in three days Eliza Anne would see her deceased mother at her bedside; which came true.

A lady known to Mrs. Sidgwick (case lxvii) went to consult a medium, who told her, "You are wearing a photograph of your children," which was correct. Indicating two, she said, "Those two are dead," which was so, and pointing to another, "This one will soon be with us, and his transition will be sudden." Some weeks later the elder son of this lady was killed in a football accident.

J. Maxwell has published (case lxxiii) the remarkable premonition given to me by Mme. X. The personality speaking through her mediumship purported to be my friend, Antoine B., long since deceased. Mme. X. predicted to me the death of Antoine B.'s widow, who had become Mme. L. by a second marriage. This lady was in very good health, but Mme. X., on looking at a few words of her handwriting, said to me, "I see the figure 7, which means that Mme. L. will soon die." Mme. L., who was quite unknown to Mme. X., died just seven weeks later.

The premonition went further. On the 8th of July, 1903, Mme. X. wrote to me, "Someone tells me (?) that one of the sons of Mme. L. will die before two years are past. I suppose it must be Jacques B., but this was not told me."

On the night of December 23d Louis B. and Oliver L. (stepson to Mme. L.) were in a disastrous railway accident on the Northern of France. The former escaped by a miracle, the latter was killed on the spot. The premonition was, however, still more exactly fulfilled than by the death of this stepson. Fate is inexorable. Mme. L. had a son, Gilbert L., who died suddenly a short time later of cardiac failure after a slight attack of diphtheria that seemed nearly cured.

Some instances of premonition are given by Remy which are the more interesting in that Remy sets himself the task of proving that nearly all so-called spiritist phenomena are due to tricks played on simple people. Mile. X., the daughter of a school inspector of Lot-et-Garonne, was amusing herself and some friends by "making a table speak." "Ask it when I shall retire," said her father, as a jest. "In eight days/' the table replied, and everyone laughed, for Mr. X., then forty-five years of age and in excellent health, had no thought of retiring.

Mr. X. died suddenly forty-five days later. I may observe that M. Remy, who is so severe on the experiences of others, is very lenient to this premonition, which proves absolutely nothing.

An eminent writer, Paul Adam (Bozzano's case xci), could write automatically messages which purported to come from VEtrangere. One evening VEtranghre said to one of the friends of Paul Adam, who was a hardened bachelor, "In four years you will marry a lady living at No. so and so, Avenue Marceau." At that time the house designated by this number was being pulled down. Four years later this gentleman met the lady in the house built on this site and married her.

Case cxii is one of the most remarkable in metapsychic literature. On December 11, 1901, Mrs. Verrall wrote automatically, "Nothing should be neglected, the most trifling facts may be useful; be trustful.... The cold was intense and a single candle gave a poor light. He was lying on the sofa or on a bed, and was reading Marmontel by the light of a single candle. She will remember" (referring probably to Mrs. Sidgwick). "The book was lent him, it did not belong to him."

On December 17th Mrs. Verrall had a second message: "The name Marmontel is correct... a French book, I think his memoirs. The name Passy may help him to remember Passy or Fleury. The book was bound in two volumes, the binding was old, and the book was lent him. The name Marmontel is not on the cover."

On March 1st Mr. Marsh, a friend of Mrs. Verrall, related at table in her house that he had read the memoirs of Marmontel one bitterly cold night in Paris, the 20th of February, by the light of a candle, once when in bed and again reclining on two chairs, that he had spoken of its contents to friends in Paris, that the book was in three volumes, of which he had borrowed two from the London Library and that on February 21st he had read the chapter in which Marmontel describes the finding of a picture painted at Passy, and that the discovery was associated with M. Fleury.

We have here a prediction of a series of unimportant events in minute detail. These events could not possibly be anticipated (nobody reads Marmontel), even the single light being specified.

The prediction was on December 11, 1901, and the events did not take place till February 21, 1902.

Miss Freer (Bozzano's case c), looking in the crystal, sees a man's head wrapped in some undefinable thing, looking in at the small window of her room. Three days later there was a fire and a fireman came to that little window, with his head wrapped in a wet cloth, presenting exactly the image she had seen.

J. Maxwell cites an interesting case. A., looking in the crystal, sees a large steamer with black, white, and red bands on the funnel, bearing the name Leutschland, enveloped in smoke and sinking, passengers and people in uniform running about the decks. Eight days later the newspapers announced the bursting of a boiler on board the Dentschland. A. was in no way concerned with maritime affairs.

With the exception of the Saurel prediction, which will be described later, all the spiritist predictions relative to the Great War are too vague for notice. Mrs. Chenoweth's premonitions, despite the care with which Hyslop has collected them, are uncertain, being little, if at all, beyond the reach of normal intelligence.

As for premonitions announcing serious events, generally deaths, by noises and knocks, there are many, but few are evidential. It will suffice to mention that of the Rev. T. B. Wood, who heard on the eve of his father's death three distinct knocks on the andirons. He, and also his servant Cyril, heard loud knocks on October 20, 1919, and said, "It is the Wood knockings; someone is going to die." Three days later a cousin, till then in good health, died suddenly.1



(c) Accidental Premonitions

I refer to this class all premonitions which occur unexpectedly to normal persons, without experiment, without crystal vision, planchette, automatic writing, or any other all-voluntary action. The premonition comes to them unsought. These may be classed (with Bozzano) as follows: Premonitions —

Of sickness and death due to natural causes.

Of accidental deaths.

Of sundry events.

*P. Myers, S. P. R., xi and Kingsford, loc. cit., 161.



(a) Premonitions of Sickness and Death Due to Natural Causes

Miss B. was exceedingly anxious about her father's health, though medical opinion was that his indisposition was very slight. She hurried back, whenever obliged to leave the house, fearing to hear of misfortune. This lasted for some days. One day her father fell in an apoplectic fit.

This case is not evidential, for the daughter might well guess her father's danger from various symptoms. I only mention this case (Bozzano's xxvii) as a caution that none such should ever be brought forward as having any value.

M. Salvatore Balsamo (xxxi), watching at the bedside of his brother-in-law, hears a noise of breaking glass and china in the next room a short time before the death. Several persons in the sick-room heard the same and state that there were loud knocks on the terrace, for which no natural cause could be found.

Here, again, the premonition is too vague and the brother-inlaw's death too likely to make the account worth consideration. Only methodical study of a large number of such cases will enable inferences to be drawn.

Mrs. Baker's sister sees a coffin before the piano in the drawingroom (case xxxiii). She nearly faints when telling her vision. Three weeks later another sister died and her coffin was placed in front of the piano, just where it had been seen.

Moritz gives the story of the pastor Ulrici, who saw in a dream one of his clerical friends dead. He told the dream to his wife, went to the church and preached, but was still obsessed by his dream. Later in the day a servant came from the village of R., of which his friend was the minister, with the request that he would come and baptize a child. He asked why their own pastor did not perform the office. The answer was, "Because he is unable to do so." M. Ulrici said, "It is because he has died." M. Ulrici, therefore, saw the death of X. eleven hours before it occurred, with all the attendant circumstances.1

The Rev. Mr. Dulley relates that Mrs. Jones, watching by her sick child in the early days of September, saw three little coffins put into a hearse, two white and one pale blue. Her little boy Peter died on October 2d, and also a neighbor's little son. Both

1Cite par Passavant, Unters. iiber den Lebentnagnetismus, 2d edit., p. 135, Frankfort, 1837.

funerals were on the same day, and at the last moment a third coffin, a pale-blue one, was brought. It was that of a child in the same parish whom Mrs. Jones did not know. When this last coffin appeared, Mrs. Jones cried out, "That was my dream/' She had already told her husband on the morning following the dream.

M. Adrien Dufilhol relates that his grandfather heard a voice saying, "A death in the family." The grandfather thought in silence, "I am the eldest; is it I?" The voice answered "No, it is Adolphe Planes." Adolphe was Mme. Dufilhors brother and was not ill; two months later he died unexpectedly.1

The next case may possibly be attributed to coincidence, though this is unlikely. Mr. Lauritzen never made a memorandum of any dream except this one of which he wrote in his diary: "Three days ago I dreamed that F. F. would be free in four years." The phrase "to be free" was used to signify death. Mr. F. F. was then in perfect health. He died four years and four days after Mr. Lauritzen's dream.2

The following premonition is somewhat vague, but the symbolism is very interesting. Mrs. Munro dreamed of her son, an officer of the Flying Corps in Palestine. She saw him with a serious wound in the forehead and heard a voice saying, "He has eaten an ice; it has given him a headache." Then she saw her son as he had been at eleven or twelve years old. At that age he could not eat ices, they gave him headache. Mrs. Munro was so disturbed by this vision that she sent for the doctor, who found her ill from the emotion. Her son was killed on November 2, 1917, by a bullet in the head (/. S. P. R., December, 1920, 272).

Mrs. Morrison, at Wellesley, in India, heard a voice saying, "When the darkness thickens at the eleventh hour death will pass." Mrs. Morrison, who was in bed, got up in a fright; the words were repeated again by the same voice, slowly and deliberately. Two days later Mrs. Morrison's little daughter fell grievously ill. For eight days there was no cloud in the sky, but on the eighth day a terrible storm arose and a few minutes before eleven the house was quite dark. The child died at 1 p.m. (A. S. P., 1907, xviii, xxxv, 712).

Bozzano's case xxxviii shows a strange symbolism. Mrs. Z., paying a visit on June 15th, saw (in imagination) an unknown

xCite par Flammarion, loc. cit., 538.

2Case of Dream, Journ. S. P. R., December, 191 1, 173.

man by her hostess, who plunged a knife into her side. She told Professor Andrew Lang, who laughed at her and said, "FU bet a hundred pounds that this vision will not be realized/'

Mrs. Z., again visiting her friend, met the man of her dream on the stairs, to her great amazement. Her friend was dying and the man in question was the surgeon who had operated on the left side of her chest.

Mme. Buscarlet writes to Mme. Moratief, on December 11th, a letter that has been preserved: "I have had a queer dream. You and I were in the country when a carriage passed us, and from it there came a voice that called us. It was Olga Popoff, who said, 'I have called you to tell you that Mme. Mitchinoff will leave the Institute on the 17th/ " Two weeks later Mme. Mitchinoff died of acute diphtheria on the 16th of the month, and on the morning of the 17th the body was taken to an adjoining chapel for fear of contagion.1

This is a well-marked case of premonition, rigorously authenticated, and so precise that no accidental coincidence can be alleged.

Mme. L. knew that a friend of hers, Mr. C, was ill. On a Monday night she dreamed that the doctor in attendance came and said gravely and sadly, "Mr. C. will die on Thursday at four o'clock/' She woke up, repeating "Thursday at four." Her husband said to her, "What do you mean?" On Thursday Mr. C. was better and seemed to be recovering, but had a relapse and died on the following Thursday at four o'clock (/. 5*. P. R., December, 1906, 340).

Mrs. Campbell (xlvi) dreamed that she was attending a funeral in a snow-storm. She could not read the name on the coffin, but saw an abundance of flowers and in the middle a large bouquet of roses. She told the dream and it was considered prophetic of bad news. Twenty minutes later she had a telegram recalling her to Montreal, where her sister was taken ill. Some months later this sister died, and during the funeral a heavy snow-storm came on. The coffin was covered with flowers with a bouquet of bright colored roses in the midst.

Alexandra S., aged nine, at Trieste, saw a hearse and dead body just as she was about to go out for a walk. She threw herself into her mother's arms, crying and saying, "Someone is

^his case is reported by Flournoy in the Arch, de Psychologie of Geneva. He adds also some critical remarks that I cannot endorse; they seem to me insufficient. See also A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 710.

dead." All those about her were in perfect health, but three days later her father was taken ill in the night. He looked at the child, who said, "Mother, how do people look when they are going to die?" Her father died a few minutes later (A. S. P., 1899, ix, 196).

The next case is very evidential, by reason of the number oi unlikely details exactly foreseen.

The Duchess of Hamilton had a kind of vision of Lord L., whom she only knew by sight, and did not know to be ill, stretched on a sofa as if insensible, and a man with a sandy beard bending over him. There was also a bathroom with a red light. This was told by the Duchess of Hamilton to Dr. Cooper, who was attending Lord L.

Lord L. recovered from his indisposition, but fifteen days later a more serious illness supervened; and Dr. Cooper saw the scene described — the patient nearly insensible, the bathroom, the red lamp, and an attendant with a sandy beard.

The good faith of the duchess and Dr. Cooper being unquestionable, the premonition must be of a metapsychic nature, for accidental coincidence is not to be thought of.

Bozzano places premonitions made long before the event in a special class by themselves. A very remarkable one is as follows:

Mr. Edisburg was a medical student, who, in 1859, had a dream of which he could only recall the date "June 9, 1864." He spoke of it to the assistant surgeon, saying, "It is the date of my death or of some great misfortune," and he wrote on the hatrack of the antechamber in the hospital, "June 9, 1864, J. F. E."

Five years passed. Mr. Edisburg married, and his wife died on the 9th of June, 1864. Returning to the hospital he and two of his friends verified the date written on the rack.

If the calculus of probabilities be applied to this wonderful premonition, we might set the odds at 1: 365 x 5, or say 1: 1,800 (as if the red came up eleven times running at roulette). This, however, would be grossly against good sense, for it would omit all consideration of the cause whereby this date was presented to the mind of the dreamer. To return to the analogy of the roulettewheel, it is one thing to say, "I know that the red will not come up eleven times running" and quite another to say that this has happened in the course of a long series of trials. The premonition consists in the fact that the date was indicated only once, and correctly. If eighteen students were each to indicate some fateful date in the ensuing five years there might well be coincidences, but in this case there was but one who had that prevision and the prevision was verified. Chance cannot be invoked.



(b) Premonitions of Accidental Death

Premonitions of natural death, at any rate when not long before the event, can be referred to some kind of cognition of the organic condition of the person whose death or illness is foreseen. This, however, in no way applies to accidental deaths; hence the metapsychic importance of premonitions of sudden, tragic, and unlikely deaths that no mere perspicuity could foresee.

Captain de Montluc, in his commentaries, tells how he foresaw by a dream the mortal wound of Henry II of France in a tournament. "The night before the tourney in my first sleep I dreamed that I saw the King seated in a chair, his face all covered with drops of blood, and I could neither discern what ailed him nor see anything but the blood on his face. I seemed to hear others say, 'He is dead' and others 'He is not dead yet/ I saw the doctors and surgeons coming and going... and on awaking the tears were on my face, nor for some time could I refrain from weeping. My wife tried to console me, but I could not be persuaded. Several persons living know that this is not a tale, for I told it as soon as I was awake. Four days afterwards a messenger arrived at Nerac, bringing the letter from the Constable of France to the King of Navarre, telling him of the wound and the small hope of life" (Flammarion, La Mort et son Mvstkre, 536).

Another historical document is quoted by Flammarion: Nicolas Pasquier writes to his brother, "Last year, on August 30th, about five in the morning, I dreamed that I was with our father, who was in bed, whence he rose to pray to God, which he did devoutly with both hands raised. When his prayer was ended he changed colour and fell dead into my arms. I awoke, trembling, told the dream to my wife, and to keep the memory of it unfaded I wrote it down. Thus I saw our father's death one year exactly to a day before it happened (Etienne Pasquier died August 30, 1615). On the actual date of his death I came across the paper of which I had not thought again. The news only reached me on September 3d. If you dissect this dream you will see that all the circumstances were foreseen — that he would not be long ill (he was only ill ten hours), that he would die a good Christian and in full possession of his senses." Certainly the approaching death of Etienne Pasquier, then aged eighty-six, was not unlikely, but even so the coincidence of dates is noteworthy.

Baron L. Hellembach (Bozzano, lviii) intended to consult the celebrated Hauer, his colleague, on a matter of science. During the preceding night he dreamed that he saw a man (unrecognized) pale and helpless, held up by two men. In the morning he went to the geological institution that Hauer directed, and finding the door shut, looked through the window, where he saw the exact repetition of his dream. Hauer had poisoned himself with potassium cyanide.

Recognition is wanting here; possibly, too, Baron Hellembach did not tell his dream to anyone before verification, so that paramnesia may account for much; or telepathy may be admitted. Hauers mental agitation before suicide may have caused the vision.

Recognition is also wanting in the next case:

Miss Bale heard a ticking in her room like that of a clock during all the month of June, but this ceased as soon as anyone else came in. After a month and a half she had become used to the sound. On July 12th she saw a human form standing with outstretched arms. It soon vanished. On September 23d she heard of her brother's death by drowning (on July 12th), after which the ticking ceased (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 724).

Myers reports a good example of symbolical premonition: Field Marshal Lord S. dreamed two days before his daughter fell ill that he urged her to read the Life of Charles James Fox, but that she replied, "Oh, I do not need to read it; it is the end," and that she showed the last page on which "The End" was written in large black characters all across the page (P. S. P. R., 1895, xi,442).

The death of Miss S. was also the subject of a premonition. Her sister saw her standing before her, saying, "Remember, I have called you, it is five o'clock, and now I am going away; I am going away, remember."

Premonition of death in which a "double" seems to appear are not infrequent; e.g., the remarkable case of Dr. Isnard mentioned above, p. 340.

M. Boisnard dreamed very clearly of a child's funeral, coming away from a neighbouring house. The dream haunted him all day. In the evening one of the children from that house, aged four, fell into a ditch and was drowned (Bozzano, lix).

The brother of M. Zipelius, a painter of Mulhouse, aged twentyfive, said to his porter, "If I do not return this evening seek me at the mortuary. I dreamt that I was at the bottom of the water with my eyes open.,, His mother had foreseen this misfortune (how?) and when the bad news was brought her she said, "No need to say more; I know that my son is drowned." Zipelius had at first refused to bathe in the Moselle because of his dream, but in the evening he resisted no more and perished (lx).

M. A. Lavaut recognized during the war a place that he had seen clearly in a dream in 1911. He then saw himself in an officer's uniform (though he had never been in the army) surrounded by soldiers in blue. In 1918 his dream came true. It is certainly not a coincidence, as he quite rightly says; but it may possibly be a case of paramnesia. The testimony of those to whom the dream was told in 1911 is required (Revue Spirite, lxvii, 1919, 267).

On Sunday, August 14th (case lxi) Mme. Thomas saw in a dream the funeral of a child coming from the orphanage of Treforest down the left-hand slope of the hill. The coffin was borne by the other children. She went to the orphanage and was told that none of the inmates had died. On the 17th (Wednesday) a child of three, not belonging to the orphanage, was drowned; and the mother asked that the orphanage children should come to the funeral. This was permitted, the procession passing on the left side of the hill as seen by Mme. Thomas in her dream. Bozzano remarks that premonitions dealing with funerals are frequent.

Miss Gwendoline Janesson (pseudonym, /. S. P. R.f February, 1920, 161) dreamed, on the night of August 2d, that she saw a funeral and heard a voice saying to her, "It is Leonard." She saw Mr. V. and Mr. L., the two best friends of her fiance. Leonard. She then found herself alone at the tomb, and Mr. L. came and took her by the arm. She told this dream to her mother. She spent the 5th of August with her fiance, who seemed in good health, but next day collapsed in his chair and died of heart failure. There was nothing to cause any anticipation of his death.

I have myself had only one premonitory dream, and that a vague one. Though I never dream of music (for good reasons), I dreamed that I heard Chopin's "Funeral March." The impression was clear and I wondered what eminent person might be dead. Three or four days later I was invited to an important funeral and I imagined that the dream might be an interesting premonition. I went, perhaps for that reason, expecting to hear Chopin's march. I was much disappointed when nothing of the kind took place. But returning home I came across a military funeral and the band was playing Chopin's march. This may have been a coincidence, but I am inclined to think that there was a premonition.

Dr. Haye, at Norwalk, dreamed that three of the boys at his school were drowned, and he told the masters to take every care. The next day, as the boys were going for a walk, he renewed his caution; but the accident took place, and three were drowned (lix).

Mme. Mastro Pietro, an aged peasant woman of Castel di Guido, a lonely village near Rome, had terrifying dreams night after night. She heard moans and distinguished the cries of her married daughter Caroline, living in Rome. One morning she made up her mind to go to Rome, and reached her daughter's house only to find that she had been burned and had just died (case lxv).

M. Nolte sees his niece Helene, a little girl (of six) run over by a tram-car (5.30 p.m.). He told his dream and advised close care of the child; but as if destiny were inevitable, the child was run over and killed by the tram when crossing the street at that hour.

Bozzano's case, lxviii, carefully studied by Hyslop, is of extraordinary interest and lends itself to much comment.

In July, 1897, Mrs. D., whose little girl Betty was aged two years, heard a voice saying, "She will not need it," every time that she thought of the child's future. When she went to buy shoes for the child, the voice said to her, "She will not need them." Several times, both when awake and in dream, she had visions of the little one's cradle in flames. Eight days before the accident she smelt burning, though there was no fire in the house. An hour before the catastrophe she had the idea of destroying the matches in the room, but thought, "I will do it after my son comes in." At ten o'clock she put Betty into her cot, and while doing so heard a voice saying, "Turn the mattress." As she was in a hurry, she said jokingly to Betty, "I will turn the mattress when you have gone bye-bye." A few minutes later the cot was in flames and little Betty mortally burned. It is supposed that the child had found a match, had lit it, and so started the fire.

The following striking occurrence has been given me by my learned colleague, Professor Thoulet, of the Faculty of Sciences at Nancy, who has confirmed it orally several times.

Thoulet, then a student, had gone to Italy to Rivazzano, to assist a young French engineer, M. F., whose wife lived at Toulon. Thoulet and M. F. slept in adjoining rooms. In the middle of the night Thoulet got up, went into M. F.'s room, and said, "You have a little girl: the telegram says..." and he began to read an imaginary telegram whose meaning he could clearly perceive though the words disappeared by degrees. Some time later {How long? C. R.) Mr. F. received exactly the same telegram, the words and intention being the same as perceived by Thoulet in his momentary access of lucidity. "I have no material proof to give," he now says, and "if anyone told me the story I could not believe it, but I can only say that I must admit to myself that it is true."

Etienne de Grillet, a member of the Society of Friends (Quakers), relates that the Countess Toutschkoff, the wife of a Russian general, dreamed before the French invasion of 1812, that her father (living) came to her, holding her eldest son by the hand, and said, "Thy happy days are past; thy husband has fallen at Borodino." This dream was repeated three times. She told the general, and asked, "Where is Borodino?" The general did not know of this obscure village and they could not find it on the map. Some months after, her father came into her room with her eldest son as in the dream and said, "Thy husband is dead, he has fallen at Borodino!" (lxx).

Mr. Ivey, of Forney (Texas), waked one morning, December 19th, in a state of the utmost distress about his son, aged nineteen, who had taken up his abode on a neighbouring estate and was, as far as known, in no danger whatever. Mrs. Ivey also dreamed at the same time that she went on a journey in a carriage, that she was in a room in a house she did not know, surrounded by a large family, with a girl unknown to her and children about to leave for school.

In this dream there was both a monition and a premonition. The son of Mr. and Mrs. Ivey had met with a serious carriage accident on December 17th, so that his parents' distress was monitory and not premonitory. The premonitory features were the arrival of Mrs. Ivey in a carriage, she having missed the train, among the unknown family, at the bedside of her son, who died on December 19th at 1 a.m. All the details of her dream were actually reproduced (Bozzano's case, lxix).

Some reservations may properly be made as to the metapsychic bearing of the premonition, for the likelihood of the sequel to the monition itself might possibly explain it.

Three times in the course of the year 1909, Mme. Brot, of Alais, wrote to the Count de Tromelin to tell him of her presentiment that she would be widowed through a railway accident before the year's end. On December 10, 1909, her husband, employed at the station of Alais, had his head crushed by the buffer of a wagon (lxxxi).

Mme. Lolla, in Russia, dreamed that her mother came into her room saying, "Lolla, don't be frightened, but the barn is on fire." Next day the dream came true; her mother using the same words. (Is there a possibility of paramnesia here?)

Lolla, who afterwards married M. de R., went to a family chapel in the cemetery. While on her knees, praying, she heard a voice telling her, "You will be widowed, but you will not have the consolation of praying at my son's grave." She fainted with emotion. Her husband, Colonel R., some months later was mortally wounded in the battle at Moukden. His body was not recovered.



(c) Premonitions of Sundry Events

The first case adduced here is an excellent instance, because the evidence is conclusive, verified before the event, and the probability can be fairly well calculated.

M. Gallet, student of medicine at Lyons, was preparing some examination work in his room about 11 a.m. He was obsessed by a thought that distracted his work, and he wrote down in his note-book, "M. Casimir-Perier has been elected President of the Republic by 451 votes." Gallet cared nothing for politics, and the phrase dumbfounded him. He showed it to his comrade Varay, with whom he was working. After lunch Gallet went to his lectures, and meeting two fellow-students, Boucher and Delorme, he told them the premonition, at which they only laughed. After lecture, the four students went to a cafe and shortly after the Paris newspapers arrived, announcing the election of Casimir-Perier by 451 votes.1

Gallet is now a physician at Annecy, and a senator of Savoy; Varay is a physician also, at Annecy; Delorme is a pharmacist at Thonon; Boucher, a physician at Cruseilles. All four certify to the strict truth of the fact, which they remember quite clearly.

The candidature of Casimir-Perier was very doubtful, and unlikely: the betting was on Brisson or Dupuy. The probability of his election was very slight, but even admitting an equal chance for the first three candidates the probability that one of them would get 451 votes out of 845 is 1: 845. But the basis of calculation is very defective. Chance may always be invoked, it is a convenient way of avoiding thought. What was the cause that impelled Gallet to write on the margin of his anatomical notes, "Casimir-Perier has been elected by 451 votes"? This case is, to my thinking, one of the most decisive proofs of premonition on record.

Several cases of premonition on games of chance, lotteries, and races have been noted.

A cousin of my own, living in the country, who never bet on races, heard one evening, on putting out her lamp, loud plaudits and shouts of Clamart, Clamart. She re-lit the lamp and all was silent. On her putting out the light the plaudits began again. She thought at first that it must be the name of the station on the Paris-Versailles line shouted by the porters; but suddenly remembered that a horse of that name was running. She staked on Clamart, without knowing exactly what this bound her to. Clamart was the winner.

Charles Cascel, two months before the ballot for military service, saw something undefined in his room on which there appeared the number 90 in large figures. He shut his eyes and re-opening them still saw the figures 90. Frightened by this, he

lThe results of the voting were:

Voters: 845. Votes

Casimir-Perier 45 1

A. Brisson 195

Dupuy 97

General Fevrier 33

Arago 27

Divers 22 began to pray (sic)* On the day of the drawing he announced that he would draw number 90, which he did, to the amazement of those present.

Several analogous cases have been collected by Professor Hulin of the University of Ghent.

To estimate justly the value of such divinations we ought to know how many have failed, for too often the successes are noted and the failures are forgotten. The calculus of probabilities is only applicable if strict records be kept of all trials, and if failures are taken into account as well as successes, which is very seldom done.

Some interesting facts relative to roulette at Monte Carlo were collected by a friend of mine, an experienced physicist and mathematician, who communicated to me the results of his methodical enquiries and calculations of probability. His wife, Lydia, aged thirty, and the mother of a family, had some occasional premonitions, of which only the following have been accurately noted:

On the 2d of May, after seven or eight days on which Marcel had steadily lost, she said, I dreamed that we should win on 14. Marcel then staked eighteen consecutive times on twelve numbers: the 14 won. On these twelve numbers of his system, four only succeeded, among which was the 14. The odds were therefore 4: 12 or 1: 3, which counts for nothing. But the 14 was repeated twice, it came up a second time immediately after winning a first time. Gamesters make a practice of leaving their stake on a winning number, and the probability of its coming up again is 1: 37; so that the probability of the 14 turning up a second time was 1/3X1/37, or 1/111; so that its turning up is not very marvellous. But on May 3d Lydia dreamed again that she would win on the 31. The event of the previous day with the 14 was repeated in exactly the same sequence; so that the two successes took place against odds of 1: 12,000.

It was observed that in the course of numerous trials Marcel never had a repetition after winning on one number; the only repetitions he had were of the 14 and the 31.

To realize how faint was the chance of correct prediction, it will be found to work out that only once in thirty-two years of daily trials would two named numbers come up in succession.

On the two following days Lydia named two other numbers that did not come up at all.

On the fifth day she said 32 and 35, without knowing why. On 124 trials the winning numbers that day were as follows:

Other numbers, less than 6 times.

The 32 and the 35 therefore came up nearly twice as often as was to be looked for. It will be remarked that 34 is intermediate between 32 and 35.

The probability can be roughly calculated as follows: Supposing that the 32 and the 35 came up 14 times when they should have come up 6, 8, or say 7 times, that would mean that they had come up 7 times more than was probable. This is a probability of (z^)7, say 1: 128. To simplify matters we will suppose that the compounded probability on the five days' play (with two failures) is 1: 110 instead of 1: 111. Then, according to the recognized formula, the total probability in round numbers is 1: 130,000.

The sixth day Lydia dreamed that she would win on the 16. At a given moment she staked on the 16, which won, the probability being 1: 37. So that on the six compounded trials the odds against correct prediction by chance alone would be 1: 5,000,000.

It is true that this calculation cannot be considered strictly accurate, for the repetition is taken into account for the first two days, the most frequent numbers on the fifth day and a single number turning up on one trial only on the sixth day; all different facts not strictly comparable.

It should be added that later on Lydia had only failures. Still, taking into account the compound event when odds were so great, the fact that the numbers were indicated before the event cdnfirms the conclusion that premonition may sometimes occur with reference to games of chance. The problem is, however, too obscure for anything more than a mere mention of the facts. M. E. Desbeaux has published an interesting note on this subject (A.S. P.f 1909, xix, 127).

Lombroso mentions the case of Rosa Tirone, quoted by Bozzano (lxxxviii). In November, 1908, she dreamed that her fiance, who had died not long before, said to her, "I do not wish you to be a servant any longer; play the numbers 4, 53, 25, and 30," and he added, "I am thirsty, get some water in a bucket and give me to drink." The four numbers named were winners, and

34 — 8 times.

35 — 7 times. 32 — 7 times.

30 — 6 times. 19 — 6 times. 3 — 6 times.

if Rosa had played the fifth number which corresponds, according to popular opinion, to giving drink to the thirsty, she would have won on this also.

The previsions mentioned by E. Carreras regarding lotteries (La Previsione dei Numeri. Luce e Ombra, 1919, xix, 127) cannot be considered evidential, for if R. could guess winning numbers more often than chance would account for, he ought to have realized considerable sums of money. It may therefore be inferred that the list given by him to M. Carreras is not complete, as indeed M. Carreras indicates (da veri indizi debbo credere che ve ne furono alcune oltre che anderono perdute). On 150 drawings of numbers with two figures, five such numbers at each drawing, the probability is 1: 20. R. chose 106 times. The probable number of successes was 5.3, say 6, but he had 19 successes. The excess is notable, but not more than might be referable to chance, especially if all the numbers played (probably losing numbers) have not been given.

It has been remarked, not without reason, that if there were any power of divination, even subconscious, with regard to games of chance, lotteries, races, etc., fortunes might be won, whereas nothing of the kind takes place. But it may be answered that verified premonitions are extremely rare, sporadic, and very exceptional. The spirit breathes where it will (spirat ubi vult), and the fateful number will not be discovered by poring over a series of figures with set purpose.

Not only is prophecy rare in those who have the power, but those who have it are very few; so that if sometimes there really are divinations, these are so infinitesimally few by comparison with normal anticipations as to be practically negligible.

Charles Linnaeus relates in his autobiography (1823) that when he was at college, where his intelligence was not highly rated, a seeress told him, "You will be a professor, you will travel to distant lands, and will be the most celebrated man in the kingdom" (xcv).

The following case is interesting, having been observed by the great Schopenhauer (Flammarion, 133):

"One morning," says Schopenhauer, "having written a letter, I laid my hand on the inkpot instead of the sand-box to dry the writing. The ink was spilt on the floor. I called the servant to wash the floor. While she did so she told me that she had dreamed the previous night of doing this and had told her dream to the other servant, who confirmed the statement.

'This story, whose truth I guarantee," says Schopenhauer, "puts the reality of such dreams beyond question. Therefore all that happens is fated.. We may accept his evidence without drawing his conclusion.

From the historical point of view we may quote a premonition occurring to Charles Dickens, reported by Walter F. Prince (Am. S. P. R., xiv, 1920). He dreamed of a lady in a red shawl, who said, "I am Miss Napier." He wrote, "Why Miss Napier? I know no Miss Napier/' Some hours later two persons came to visit him to introduce a lady in a red shawl named Miss Napier whom Dickens did not know at all.

Bozzano's case xcviii is extremely curious; it is well attested. One John Lee was condemned to be hanged for murder at Babbicombe in February, 1889. The night before his execution he dreamed that the trap-door would not work, whatever efforts were made to open it. He told this dream to the warder. In fact, the trap would not open, though it had previously been tried. When Lee was upon it he was half unconscious, and did not remember his dream.

M. Henri Buisson, on June 8, 1887, dreamed that he saw his grandmother dead on her bed and above her a sun bearing the words, June 8, 1888. The dream was told and noted down. One year later, on June 8, 1888, the grandmother died in a quarter of an hour.

He also had a premonitory dream with some strange details which he narrated before the event. On the night of April 9th he dreamed that he saw M. Lepine, the prefect of police, in the street wearing one shoe and one slipper. At this moment in the dream a fire broke out at which M. Buisson in his dream performed wonders of courage. On the evening of the same day, twelve hours after the premonitory dream, a real fire broke out in the Rue Jacquemont, and M. Buisson actually saw M. Lepine wearing one shoe and one slipper. The dream had been told on the morning of April 10th to M. Buisson's mother and uncle.

Mme. S. dreamed that she saw in her drawing-room a lady in deep mourning by the side of her child's nurse; and immediately after, in her dream, found herself in a taxi-cab, which stopped near the Place Pigalle. On the same day she received the unexpected visit of a friend, Mme. P., in deep mourning, who also quite unexpectedly invited her to dine. Mme. S. went to her room to dress, and on returning to the drawing-room saw Mme. P., the nurse, and the child in precisely the same positions as seen in her dream. A few minutes later Mme. P. said, "It is late, we will take a taxi." The cab took them to the Rue Douai, quite near to the Place Pigalle.

Mme. Ohmus had a horrible dream (xcix), which she told to her husband. She saw herself stretched on the ground, both arms crushed and bleeding. In the evening her little dog Nello was run over by a train. Mme. O. then felt the same sensations as in her dream. It would seem that in this case the premonition was of the emotions produced by the accident and not of the accident itself.

Sir A. Conan Doyle reports a personal experience, extremely vague and non-evidential. "Upon April 4, 1917, I awoke with a feeling that some communication had been made to me of which I had only carried back one word, which was ringing in my head. That word was Piave. To the best of my belief I had never heard that word before. As it sounded like the name of a place... I looked up the index of my atlas... a river in Italy some forty miles behind the front line which at that time was victoriously advancing.... I could not think how any military event of consequence could arise there, but none the less I was so impressed that I drew up a statement that some such event would occur there and had it signed by my secretary and witnessed by my wife, with the date April 4th attached" {The Nezv Revelation, p. 112).

Six months later this river became the front line between the Italian and the Austro-Hungarian armies.

As to this case it is impossible to prove that there was no subconscious remembrance of this geographical name, which must certainly have fallen under Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's eyes some time in 1915 or 1916. There may be a premonition involved, and perhaps the time will come when such facts can be classed as authentic premonitions; but as yet they can only be recorded without drawing any inference from them.

A friend of Miss Violet Lloyd, a well-known English actress, dreamed that Miss Lloyd's face was burned above her eyes. She told this to another friend, who did not dare tell Miss Lloyd. The next day Miss Lloyd, playing Flora in The Topsy Turvy Hotel, had her face burned, with two wounds above the eyes (case ci).

Mrs. Carleton (Bozzano's case ciii) wrote to Colonel Coghill, to whom she had not written for a very long while, to say that she had had a vision in which she had seen him thrown from his horse and in a dangerous situation from which several strangers were endeavouring to extricate him. The vision was on March 26th, the letter on the 28th. On the latter date the colonel answered, "Do not be anxious, there is nothing the matter, dreams are vain." On the 30th, however, he had a terrible fall from his horse which fell into a ditch and was extricated with difficulty from his dangerous position by some friends.

Mr. O. dreamed, though he says it was a vision rather than a dream, that his little nephew, aged six, fell under the wheel of a carriage and was seriously though not mortally hurt. As the dream was much on his mind, he recommended three different persons to take great care of the child. Two weeks later, during a carriage drive, the boy fell under a wheel and had his leg broken.

Sir Oliver Lodge received from an eminent English minister the following account (Bozzano, loc. ext., 343): In bright sunshine and with a cloudless sky, Mr. X. directed his wife to put forward the luncheon hour; for he had dreamed that there would be a terrible storm; that globular lightning would enter the diningroom and would destroy the chimneys of the roof opposite. Everyone jested at the dream, for the sky was quite clear. Nevertheless a storm rapidly came up, a fiery globe entered the dining-room and the chimneys of the neighbouring roof were thrown to the ground.

The celebrated sculptor, Jean Dupre (Bozzano, 356) tells how, driving at Londa, on the precipitous road to Rufina, he heard a voice saying, "Stop!" He could see no one. Mme. Dupre, who was with him, saw no one, but heard the voice. Twice running he whipped up the horse and the voice came again, "Stop! Stop!" He got down and found that the axle had nearly left the wheel next the precipice. They had to finish the journey on foot.

This may be supposed to have resulted from a subconscious observation producing this kind of warning, but how can the fact that two persons heard the voice in this lonely place be explained?

Mr. Young dreamed that a slater working on the roof of an adjoining house would fall into the street, and in his dream he was advised to tell this to Mrs. Young. He did so, and then attended to his business without thinking any more of the matter. At 4 p.m., by a kind of instinctive impulse, he went into the street to the place he had dreamed of and found that the accident had taken place two minutes earlier and that the unfortunate workman was nearly dead (xvi).

Lady Z. was awakened one night by a heavy thud, as if a human body had fallen from the kitchen roof. She heard moaning, and woke her husband, Lord Z., who heard nothing. She went to sleep again but again was waked up by the same sounds. Her husband, then, at her desire, went out, but could find nothing. The next morning a workman fell in the same place and suffered much injury.

Miss A. MacLellen, of Bridgeport (Connecticut), had various interesting premonitions, most of which, however, do not depart sufficiently from normal probabilities to be evidential of a metapsychic cause. There is one that deserves mention (/. 5*. P. R.f March, 1920). On the night of July 8th, at Boston, she dreamed of a terrible railway accident, and dead and wounded being carried to the Galen Hospital. In the morning she looked in the newspapers to see if such an accident had occurred. On the 11th of July this accident happened near Bridgeport, 12 persons being killed and 48 injured, and these latter were taken to the Galen Hospital — a small private hospital in Boston.

The next case (Bozzano's cx) is one of the most remarkable extant. It cannot be explained by paramnesia; most of its detail was told before the event to Mme. de Figueroa, though it was not written down.

Giovanni de Figueroa, one of the most brilliant fencing masters of Palermo, had a most vivid dream and told his wife all that he had seen: a road white with dust; a large cultivated field, a rustic shed with a cart and harness; a peasant wearing dark-coloured trousers and a black hat, who invites M. de Figueroa to come in. They enter a small stable full of mud and dung. At the other end of the stable some winding stone stairs. A mule tethered to a movable manger obstructs the passage-way. M. de F. causes the mule to be pushed aside and mounts the stairs. At the top of the staircase is a room with a wooden floor and bundles of maize, tomatoes, melons, and onions hanging from the ceiling. In this room, two women, one old, the other young, also a little girl, whose features were clearly seen and remembered. In the next room a double bed, very high off the ground, higher than M. de F. had ever seen.

M. de F. and his wife thought much over this very clear and intricate dream, but could find no meaning in it (August, 1910).

On the 12th of October of the same year M. de F. was asked to assist a fellow-townsman in a duel.

They left, with the two seconds, in an automobile for Marano, a little place of whose very existence M. de F. did not know. As they were going through the country, M. de F. recognized the white road seen in his dream, and said to his companions, "I have seen this before, we shall come to a wooden house and shed." Then all the details of the dream were met with in reality — the peasant in dark trousers and black hat, the mule tethered to the manger that had to be displaced to allow them to reach the stairs, the upper room with the melons, onions, and maize, the three women, the high bed in the next room, etc. The sensation made on M. de F.'s mind was so strong that he says he completely forgot the duel about which he had come.

If some few of the minor details may be referable to paramnesia, there is none the less a mass of facts which have a strongly metapsychic character. I have had to condense and summarize the account and no adequate idea can be formed of the events unless the narrative is read in the original version.

The case of the Abbe Gamier {La Mort et son Mystere, 277) is analogous to the Figueroa case. Gamier, in 1846, while at the seminary, saw the whole of an unknown landscape with many details — sheep, men with pointed hats, a foal, a pug-dog, children playing, etc. Three years after, in 1849, when travelling in Italy, he found the whole of these details reproduced in actuality. His good faith is not in doubt, but can he be certain of details enumerated four years later? We must consider some paramnesia possible or even probable, some illusion of having "seen before." A premonition when not written down or told before the event can never be taken as evidential.

Some other premonitions narrated by Flammarion (Princess Carolath, p. 274; Mme. Lebas, p. 283; and Aimee Roger, p. 284) are open to the same objection.

M. Saurel, in 1911, dreamed that he saw a field and stream beside a large building, in a part of the country unknown to him. Soldiers were drawing water, camping, and lighting fires. They were wearing a pale-blue uniform and a curious kind of helmet. He himself was in officer's uniform. On awaking he told the dream to several friends. In 1918 this dream was completely realized. This premonition, attested by M. Saurel's father and mother as having been told them in 1911, should be read in the original; it is most interesting (Flammarion, Death and its Mystery).

Another most interesting premonition, for which perhaps fresh documentary proofs are needed, refers to one of the greatest events of contemporary, indeed of all history. It is a premonition relative to the assassination of the Archduke Ferdinand at Sarajevo, June 28, 1914, for this crime initiated the greater crime of the war, 1914-1918.

Mgr. Joseph de Lanyi, Bishop of Grosswarden, dreamed on the morning of June 28th, at 4 a.m., that he saw on his study table a black-edged letter bearing the arms of the Archduke. M. de Lanyi had been professor of the Hungarian language to the Archduke. In his dream he opened the letter and at its head saw a street into which an alley opened. The Archduke was seated in a motor-car with his wife; facing him was a general, and another officer by the side of the chauffeur. There was a crowd about the car and from the crowd two young men stepped forward and fired on the royal couple. The text of the letter ran, "Your Eminence, dear Dr. Lanyi, my wife and I have been victims of a political crime at Sarajevo. We commend ourselves to your prayers. Sarajevo, June 28, 1914, 4 a.m."

"Then," says Mgr. de Lanyi, "I woke up trembling; I saw that the time was 4.30 a.m., and / wrote down my dream, reproducing the characters that had appeared to me in the Archduke's letter. At six, when my servant came, he found me seated at my table, much shaken and telling my rosary. I said at once to him, 'Call my mother and my host, that I may tell them the dreadful dream I have had/ "

During the day a telegram arrived giving the terrible news.

Such is the letter that Edouard Lanyi, S. J., a professor at Laufkirchen, received from his brother, Mgr. Lanyi. Hearing of this letter, M. Grabinsky made certain enquiries which confirmed all these facts. The results of this enquiry are given in Psychische Studien, 1918, xliv, 324 and 465.

In this premonition all the details are very full and correct, except as to the shots fired. Bombs were really used, and thrown twice.

It may, however, be asked why this extraordinary premonition was not published till 1918. It may be surmised also that Mgr. de Lanyi knew that the Archduke would go to Sarajevo and that some danger to him might be apprehended.

Granting that it would be absurd to suppose an imposture on the part of Mgr. de Lanyi and his brother, these objections do not seem to me sufficient to warrant a refusal to consider this fine instance of premonition as authentic.

I shall now give in fairly full detail one of the most remarkable cases recorded in psychic science. It may be divided into two parts, the first part having reference to facts which came to pass after the prediction, but were published or told to us after they came to pass; and the second, snorter and more vague, concerning facts that were told me and published before they came to pass.

In November, 1913, I had a visit from Dr. Tardieu, a former house-surgeon and then consultant at the Mont Dore Hospital, who had been a pupil of my father's, and said to me, "I have some very important things to tell you. According to certain indications and revelations personal to myself, the time seems come to speak of these things, and I think it necessary to tell you of them now." He then gave me the narrative that here follows in an abridged form; as he gave it, the detail was lengthy:

"In 1868 I left the Medical School, as a young doctor. I had a close friend named Sonrel, a brilliant mathematician and physicist, an astronomical student at the Paris Observatory. One day in July, about 5 p.m., we were conversing as we walked in the Luxemburg Gardens, when Sonrel suddenly stopped, as if in a trance. He spoke, and spoke without heeding anything that I said to him, and without seeing anything round him. He said:

"How strange! I see you in uniform! Yes, you have a military cap and in it you are counting money, and you are on a railway! Where are you going? To Hirson? To Sedan? Oh, my poor country! My country!... I, too, am in uniform, a superior officer. Is it possible? I am mortally ill.... I shall die in three days, but you are there, you come in time to see me before I die, to watch over my children! Wait now, wait.... Years pass. It is a vast war! What bloodshed! God! What bloodshed! Oh, France! Oh, my country! Thou art saved! Thou art on the Rhine! Oh, France, thou art ever the queen among nations! All admire thee \n

I give these words of Dr. Tardieu's from memory; he published them in April, 1914, in the A. S. P. I have asked him to correct anything that is inexact, but the version above is that which he gave me in November, 1913. Dr. Tardieu added:

"The whole of this astonishing prediction was realized. At the end of August, 1870, I was appointed by Nelaton to the charge of a military hospital. I had a military uniform, and having collected money for the wounded at the head of my detachment on the way to the station, I was counting the amount received, in my cap.

"Not till then did I remember my friend's prediction, so that when my comrades asked where we were going I said, 'I know, to Hirson and Sedan.'

"In September, 1870, Sonrel was appointed commandant of engineers; but in the early days of the siege he fell a victim to hemorrhagic smallpox. I arrived just in time for his last moments. He was awaiting me and kept on saying, 'Tardieu will come; I see him coming/

"He had married in 1869, had one child, and in September, 1870, his wife was enceinte."

Dr. Tardieu added also: "The personal predictions that Sonrel made to me are on the point of being realized, and I presume that the second part of his prediction will come to pass like the first. That is why I come to tell you."

At my repeated request, not without some reluctance, he consented to write out what he had told me verbally, and all these premonitions were published in the A. S. P. for June, 1914.

The critical study of this now celebrated prophecy falls naturally into two parts: For the events of 1870, which constitute the first part, we have only the testimony of Dr. Tardieu; but his good faith and sincerity are as unquestionable as my own, or that of Oliver Lodge, or William James. I would willingly admit that defective memory may cause some small details to be inaccurately reported; but the essential facts, the prediction of the war of 1870, and SonreFs speedy death, were certainly spoken of in the Luxemburg Gardens in July, 1868. Moreover, there is another certain fact — Dr. Tardieu has repeatedly told the story in the same way. Therefore we are dealing with an authentic premonition, very full of detail, and nearly unique in science by reason of this abundance of detail which certainly did not originate in Dr. Tardieu's well-controlled and scientific mind.

The criticism of the second part of the prediction referring to 1914-1918 is of a different kind. There are much fewer details — to speak accurately, there are none. War, bloodshed, the Rhine, victory are not details of events; but the premonition was written and printed before the event, so that there can be no uncertainty whatsoever about its authenticity.

Certainly the political situation in Europe in 1913 was not reassuring; but in November of that year it was perhaps less strained than in 1910, and Dr. Tardieu was induced to come and speak to me, not by the European situation, but by the fulfilment of personal prophecies that Sonrel had made to him and of which he gave me only a very partial and vague summary. Certainly some of the wording of the prediction is very applicable: "What bloodshed! What slaughter! But France reaches the Rhine. Oh, France, queen of nations, all admire thee!"

Another premonition printed before the event in the journal La Vie Nouvelle, of Beauvais (Nos. 324, 325), appeared in February and March, 1914; communicated to the paper by the Abbe J. A. Petit, being utterances in trance by a simple peasant girl, who during her trance spoke as if she were Jeanne d'Arc, the guide of France, There is much irrelevant matter proceeding normally from the single supposition of approaching war, already apprehended in February, 1914. I quote only the interesting parts:

"In a very short time France will be invaded by enemy masses on the northwest (with respect to Domremy). Their entry will be victorious by reason of their number and the ignorance of their designs that still prevails in France. When this invasion begins our armies will not be expecting it. The invasion will come by the northwest frontier of two departments, and the invading forces will be so great that they will reach several towns of a third department. It will be necessary to give up these towns. The north and the east will suffer much. The enemy will advance in a straight line parallel to the frontier."

Here comes in the account of a sanguinary battle or series of battles round a fortress (Verdun?). "The enemy will find that place three times as strong as he expected."

"But France is not alone. The violation of neutral territory has displeased other powers who unite with the French, for it is clear that this violation has been made to take possession of that land and to have a direct passage to the French frontier!*

I underline the more characteristic phrases of this confused but curious prediction.

"The allied powers will make themselves heard; the enemy will not heed them... but will persist in behaving on neutral territory as in a conquered country. The struggle will continue in this small nation and it will be bloody."

After various obscurely worded divagations, there comes:

"The enemy wavers despite the objurgations of the leaders; discouragement is followed by consternation and rout. They scarcely defend themselves; they let themselves be killed. It is the end. The French and their allies unite in laying down the basis for an equitable treaty of peace, desiring to unite all nations in justice and fraternity."

Does this refer to the League of Nations?

The above is an abridged, and therefore mutilated, summary of this interesting premonition. There is not sufficient detail of actual events to produce sure conviction that it may not be due to normal penetration and chance combined; nevertheless, in certain respects there is sufficient accuracy and prevision to give much food for thought. To form a thoroughly well-grounded opinion the original should be referred to. It seems weak, however, in comparison with the Sonrel predictions.

Lady Hester Stanhope received some prophetic communications from a certain French gentleman named Lusteneau, who announced that Aleppo and Antioch would be destroyed by earthquake. In 1822 Mr. Wolff was at Aleppo, and dining one day with Mr. Barker, M. de Lesseps, and M. Maseyk, the Danish consul, a letter from Lady Stanhope to Mr. Barker was commented on with much amusement as she warned Mr. Barker not to go to Aleppo, as the destruction of the city was impending. Some days after there was a terrible earthquake that destroyed Aleppo and Antioch, and caused 60,000 deaths. Mr. Barker had a very narrow escape.1

Premonitions of earthquakes are frequent but are generally too vague to count.2

Dr. Santi states that a lady of the Roman aristocracy said, on December 2, 1909, that she had seen in a dream the town of Messina destroyed by an earthquake and a tidal wave, and that this catastrophe would take place on the 8th, the 18th, or the 28th of that same month. She wrote to the King of Italy to the above effect a letter which Dr. Santi saw and kept. Messina was destroyed by an earthquake and a tidal wave on December 28, 1909 (Bozzano, 335).

At Nice, during the night of March 5, 1921, Mme. F. dreamed that she was taken into a distant country, arid, deserted, and quite unknown to her, where she could see nothing like what she was

bozzano, 334, after William Howitt, History of the supernatural, ii, 26. "See also the references to the Martinique earthquake in the A. S. P.

accustomed to. In her dream her (deceased) father told her she was in Brazil. While looking at the strange landscape she saw people running away in terror, for the earth was torn up on all sides. She told this dream to her husband and to her brother.

On the morning of March 6th the newspapers of Paris and Nice announced (for the first time) that a terrible earthquake in China had caused the deaths of 250,000 persons. Mme. F. could not possibly have had any knowledge of this event on March 5th. Conversation on that day had turned on Brazil, but not on earthquakes.

Is this a case of cryptesthesia or mere coincidence? It is to be noted (1) that Mme. F. never dreamed of seismic convulsions, and (2) that the Chinese earthquake is one of the most serious on record.

The following premonitions are of quite trivial events; their interest lies in the precise details given.

M. Mittelmayer (Bozzano's xxvi), a schoolmaster at Dingolfing (Bavaria), dreams that a peasant returning from early mass comes to tell him that M. F. wishes to take him to Fosthart to a small meeting of ecclesiastics and schoolmasters, and that at the inn there he sees a gentleman take the Milnchcner Post out of his pocket. Mr. Mittelmayer told the dream to his wife. On the following day the dream was fulfilled in every detail. When M. F. came, M. M. told him the dream, but no satisfactory explanation could be found. At Fosthart there was a man reading the Milnchener Post.

Mr. S. H. (case cxiv), on awaking, saw close to his table a greyheaded man, with his back to the door; he was in his shirt-sleeves, and Mr. H. felt that he knew the man but could not place him. He told the fact to his wife and three employees. He then went to his office, and seeing from a distance someone coming towards them he said to the employees, "Here is my man coming along." This man having entered the office found it very hot; he took off his coat and appeared in his shirt-sleeves as Mr. H. had seen him in the dream.

Mme. A., in a high fever and half delirious, sees a woman bending over her. She sees only down to the waist and is aware of the Christian name Marie; the surname she is unable to read, but ends in "et." Two days later she was looking for quarters in the country to rent, and in the little village of Crosnes, which she did not know, she found what she desired, and in the same house another lodger, whom she recognized. "I am sure," she said, ''that your name is Marie/' Her name was Marie Gallichet (Bozzano, cxvii).

Mrs. Z. had a very vivid dream that she saw herself with her sister in Richmond Park, and that she found on a chair a hatpin with a head like a medal, which she gave to her housemaid. She told the dream, which doubtless led her to go to Richmond, where she found the hatpin and duly gave it to her housemaid.

This case is curious; there is the one most unlikely premonition — the finding of the hatpin. The rest seems to have been determined by the dream itself. The interest of such events does not consist in the importance of the matter referred to. Trivial incidents are often the most curious, by reason of their unlikelihood and the amount of details.

Mme. Albert Richet, my daughter-in-law, tells me the following story: "On Sunday, December 28, 1919, at about 5 p.m., I was in the Paris Metropolitan Railway, going from the 'Pasteur' station to Pigalle. The compartment was full of people, and I was quite normal. At the Solferino station, the train had nearly stopped, when I heard loud cries of distress from a woman and a child in the next compartment behind us, and at the same time, a hubbub as of many people rushing to the place. I got up to look out on the platform for the cause of this tumult, but could see nothing unusual. I asked a lady (unknown) who was in the compartment with me, 'Do you not hear it?' She looked astonished and said, 'No, I hear nothing/ I then realized that the whole had taken place in my imagination. It seemed to me, however (though I cannot be sure), that the train was slower than usual in starting.

"A few moments later we reached the next station (Chambrc des Deputes), and when the train stopped, I heard exactly repeated all that I had previously heard — the screams, the noise of the crowd, etc. They said that a woman whose child was nearly suffocated by the crowd had screamed. I could see nothing because the people in my compartment all crowded at the door to see what was occurring. This time the train stopped for a considerable time.

"A singular fact is that the unknown lady to whom I had spoken said only, Tt is a premonition/ without further remark. She got out at the next station, Concorde. This is the first time that anything of the kind has happened to me; and though I often travel by the Metro this is the only time that there has been any such accident. I was much affected by it and the whole details are strongly impressed on my mind."

This case is very clear. There cannot be paramnesia, because the auditory hallucination was spoken of before the event. It can hardly be referred to chance; and finally, the hallucination is quite decidedly subjective.

Two facts of the same kind, but not very evidential, are as follows: A schoolmaster, M. Savelli, of Costa in Corsica, on returning home with a friend, heard cries and lamentations from a house near by. M. Savelli and his friend ascertained that nothing was wrong. On the following day passing the same place they heard the same cries, but this time they were real; a child had been taken with croup and had died.

The other story is told by M. Napoleoni, a retired sergeantmajor: Passing at midnight with a friend before two detached houses, they heard hammering. Two days later they were passing again, and heard the same sound, but real. The village carpenter was making a coffin for a shepherd who had died the day before.

Mr. Bowring (Bozzano, cxx) dreamed that he saw his favourite canary dead in its bath, with extended wings. He told his wife, who at once went to look at the cage, and found nothing wrong. Next morning the bird was found dead in its bath with its wings spread out. Some other birds had occasionally been found dead, but always with their wings closed.

Mrs. Johnson (cxxi), who is accustomed to note down her dreams and visions (it would be well if all sensitives would do this), saw herself leaving an empty shop in a strange country, and in the shop a very large red tam-o'-shanter cap such as a buffoon might wear. Some time later she went unexpectedly to the Riviera, and there going into an empty florist's shop she recalled her vision. Before her was a man in the huge red cap — it was carnival time — making her extravagant bows.

The story told by Mr. Tweedale, the astronomer, is very noteworthy. One morning at 4 a.m. he dreamed that he saw a comet in the east just before sunrise. The impression was so strong that he went at once to his observatory, and found the comet, which was invisible to the naked eye. He then went to the telegraph office before it had opened, to make his discovery known. Shortly after the post brought him news that the comet had been discovered by Barnard and Hartwig (/. S\ P. R.f November, 1906, 328). Was this a premonition or cryptesthesia?

The next case was communicated to me by Dr. Z., a Fellow of the Medical Faculty. One evening he went to see one of his friends. The friend was out, but his sister, Mme. E., was at home. My colleague was starting on his holiday two days later, and the idea came to him to invite the lady to the Faculty of Medicine to hear a paper read. Then, being alone in Paris, he said to Mme. E., "I will take you to the cinema this evening." They found, however, that the cinema was closed; and walking on, came to the Grand Guignol, where they went in just as the curtain was going up. Soon Mme. E., much disturbed, grasped the hand of the doctor, saying, "It is my dream." She had dreamed that a man in hideous mask, and his cap drawn down over his eyes and with a bottle in his hand, was pursuing her with hostile intent. The piece (The Mask) represented an unfortunate man whose face had been so mutilated by an accident that he had to wear a mask and to pull his cap down over his eyes, as in Mme. E.'s dream. Between the acts, Dr. Z., to calm the lady, asked her if she had had any other dream. "Yes," she said, "I saw you coming towards me in a palace, with statues all round." "Just so," said Dr. Z., "that, no doubt, is because you sang the other day that song of Mignon about marble statues."

On the following day, in the Salle des Pas Perdus of the Faculty, Dr. Z., going forward towards Mme. E., saw her again much disturbed. "This was what I dreamed of," she said. "I saw all this — the statues, the railing, and you were coming towards me, just as you have now done."

One interesting element has been omitted from our present classification — the purpose that might be called tutelary shown by some premonitions. Bozzano has a special chapter on premonitions that save from dangers. These are relatively few, and to be fair, we ought also to speak of those which do not save, which are much more frequent. In some cases, however, the premonitory warning has been so unquestionable that one might almost be warranted in the strange inference that an external protecting will had given the caution. This would only be in cases where no subconscious notion can have conveyed any sort of anticipation. In order that any premonition may be recognized as tutelary, the danger against which a warning is given must be quite unforeseeable.

A few cases are given below:

Mr. Wiltshire was awakened very early one morning by a voice calling him loudly and repeatedly. His son heard nothing. The voice was not recognized by him, but seemed agitated; and the impression given was that some misfortune was impending, and that he would be urgently wanted. As he was a cattle-breeder he went out to inspect his stables. There was no one in the settlement but a young female servant who showed much mental distress; she was walking very fast and Mr. W. soon lost sight of her; but he heard cries of distress and was just in time to save her from drowning in a deep well into which she had thrown herself. In this instance the distinct hearing of the voice excludes the notion of coincidence (Bozzano, 381).

The next case was communicated by C. de Vesme to Flammarion, and is remarkable for several reasons. It concerns a premonition publicly given long in advance to several persons. A certain Vincent Sassaroli, the conductor of a musical band at Sartano, announced that the building in which the musicians were to play would collapse. The house belonged to a Canon Bacherini. Sassaroli insisted on a careful survey by a skilful architect. Nothing unusual was found and Sassaroli was ridiculed for his folly and timidity. On the date fixed for the performance he repeated his prediction; they all left the house laughing and mocking the visionary, but they had hardly gone out when the house crumbled down. This memorable event was the subject of a report, certified by all the inmates of the house (Flammarion, 338).

Mrs. X. had a very clear dream that she was driving in Piccadilly, near Down Street, that her coachman fell from the box, and that his tall hat was crushed. On the following day she went driving and in Piccadilly at the corner of Down Street noticed that her coachman was falling backwards, half fainting. She stopped the carriage and the man fell, so that her dream was half realized. Half only, for the hat was not crushed. A serious accident was avoided, writes Lady Z., by the prompt action caused by my recollection of the dream.



4. Conclusion

A definite inference arises from these facts, whether they be important or trivial; an inference that no criticism of details can invalidate. It is that premonition is a demonstrated fact.

In certain circumstances not as yet definable, certain individuals (mostly, though not exclusively, hypnotizable persons or mediums) can announce events to come, and give precise details on these events that are not as yet existent; details so exact that no perspicuity, no coincidence, and no chance can account for the prediction.

We are therefore driven to infer that the special, mysterious faculty that we have called cryptesthesia, whose nature and modes of action are unknown, is not only manifested for past and present facts, but also for future ones.

After all, the metapsychic cognition of existing distant facts is so marvellous that cognition of the future is not so very much more extraordinary. A. knows that B., six hundred miles away, is drowned. How can A. know this? We have not the least idea. A. announces that B. will be drowned tomorrow. It is only a little more marvellous. In the whole domain of metapsychic lucidity, so profound is the mystery and so impenetrable the obscurity that a little more or less mystery should not appal us.

Are we then to conclude that time is only a notion of our defective mental constitution, that the future is irrevocably fated, that free will is an illusion, and that there is no moral responsibility? Long discussions might be raised on that text. I shall not enter on arguments that pertain more to metaphysics than to metapsychics, nor allow myself to be led into vain speculation. I shall abide in the domain of strict facts. There are indisputable and verified facts of premonition. Their explanation may or may not come later; meanwhile the facts are there — authenticated and undeniable. There are premonitions.

Are these due solely to human intelligence, or to other intelligent forces acting on our minds? It is impossible to decide. We must be content with exact observation of the facts.

And it would be inexcusably rash to affirm, as I have boldly done, that there are premonitions, if abundant and formal proof had not been advanced. This abundant and formal proof has. I think, been given.



Book III. Objective Metapsychics



Chapter I. On Objective Metapsychics in General

The study of collective hallucinations bridges the gap between the subjective and the objective facts.

When two persons see a phantasm and describe it in the same manner, it is difficult to suppose that they have been simultaneously and identically hallucinated.

Thus the fact that there are monitions that are completely and simultaneously perceived by several persons leads us to suppose that there must be some kind of materialization; for it is impossible to understand how several persons can have the same impression if there is no exterior image of any kind. But instances of this are neither sufficiently numerous nor recorded with sufficient care as to make the demonstration complete and rigorous. Experimental methods, however, supplement the inherent defects of the observational method. The large number of experiments conducted with extreme precision which we shall presently describe give decisive proofs of materialization.

Objective metapsychics may be treated under three heads:

1. Telekinesis — movements of objects at a distance and without contact. Sounds and knocks without any visible materialized form.

2. Ectoplasmic forms — materializations of objects, of living figures, and of persons.

3. Haunted houses.

Objective phenomena of a material nature are much more rare than subjective phenomena. Only a very small number of mediums can produce them. Even with these physical mediums the phenomena are often limited to knockings and rappings and do not extend to movements of objects without contact, still less to materializations.

Physical mediums, being exceptional beings, usually become professionals as did the Fox sisters, the Davenports, Home, Eglinton, Mme. d'Esperance, Eusapia, and Marthe Beraud. Some, as Stainton Moses, Linda Gazzera, Stanislawa Tomczyk, and Miss Goligher have developed their faculties in private circles without accepting any emolument.

But in experimenting with either class, the same precautions against fraud must invariably be taken. If I myself had any mediumistic power I should exact the most rigid precautions of the kind; for it is nearly certain that mediums in trance, and especially if the trance is deep, lose all control over their movements, and despite the utmost good faith in their normal state, become liable to deception of the worst kind. Only when control of the medium has been sustained and rigid, can the results of any experiment be held to be valid, whoever the medium may be.

This severity of precaution has a corollary. If an experiment with a given medium has presented seeming fraud, that is not a final reason for irremediably discrediting that medium. The conditions must be made such that all fraud is impossible, even if the medium is suspected. When Mme. Roberts enters a cage of which I alone possess the key, and if I am certain, mechanically assured, of the solid construction of the cage, and that no one can enter the room, once I have assured myself that Mme. Roberts is inside, no devices of hers can have any effect. But if these precautions have not been taken, if some forty persons are in the hall, if the cage has not been made under my supervision but has only been superficially examined by me, and is placed on a stage at a distance, I cannot draw any inference; and my distrust will be enormously increased if the exhibition is paid for. That is quite sufficient to give me the feeling of certainty that Mme. Roberts operates by some clever trick even though I may not be able to discover in what the trick consists.

The numerous occurrences we shall now examine are those in which all trickery has been made impossible.



Chapter II. Movements of Objects — Telekinesis

The movement of objects without contact, if not the most important or the most extraordinary, is the most common phenomenon of objective metapsychics. The reactions having a supposedly metapsychic origin are most frequently manifested by the movements of a table or of a needle moving over an alphabet.



(a) Table-Movements

As far back as the time of Tertullian it was observed that tables with (or without) contact of the hands would give intelligent answers.

The essential point is to know up to what point the movements are due to the muscular contractions, conscious or unconscious, of the person placing his hands on the table. The problem seems quite simple. It is really very difficult.

Assuredly in most cases there is no doubt that movement must be referred to unconscious muscular action. So also, just as a subject, hypnotized or not, whether in trance or awake, writes pages automatically without knowing what he writes, the written matter having, however, a definite sense, he may, by placing his hands on a table, cause it to move at certain letters of the alphabet and thus sustain consistent and methodical conversations that seem to come from an external personality. Nearly always automatic writing and table-answers claim to express the thought of a personality other than that of the subject making the experiment.

It is, however, not open to doubt that in most of these cases, though not in all, these movements are to be explained by the unconscious movements of the subject. His muscles can be seen to contract, and as the least pressure will cause a table in unstable equilibrium to move, no other cause can reasonably be assigned either for table-movements or automatic writing.

The disturbing fact that sometimes leads one to hesitate in drawing this necessary inference is that the table answers as if it was alive; the emotions of the subconscious are faithfully translated by the kind of movements made by the inert object. This lifeless table seems to have a mind: it hesitates, it shows irritation; it affirms energetically; or it sways solemnly. No one who has not witnessed such seances can imagine how well diverse sentiments can be expressed by the frequency or the forcefulness, the slow, hesitating, vigorous, or gentle movements. It is an actual language, sometimes eloquent and always interesting, and the simple-minded are easily led to conclude that some external intelligence is moving the table.

But this would be a foolish inference. The emotions that one is tempted to attribute to the table are the emotions that agitate the subconsciousness of the medium; and its movements are those which the medium's muscles communicate to it. The phenomenon is one of normal psychophysiology which can be defined as follows:

There are subconscious movements, occasionally very energetic, which may be systematic and claim to belong to a special personality that seems different to that of the medium.

The problem is very far from being an elementary one; and it is a grave mistake to think that everything is explicable by unconscious muscular action. Great movements of a heavy table, when the muscular contractions are almost imperceptible, can hardly be explained in this way; so that in some cases the displacements of the table cannot be referred to muscular contractions alone. Very many times I have seen heavy tables displaced strongly and quickly, when the medium was hardly touching them: they turned, jumped, and went from one end of the room to the other so quickly that it was difficult to follow them, while the medium was only lightly placing one finger on the middle of the table.

Among other experiments of this kind I will quote the following, which is typical: For the experiments I was making at Ribaud Island with Eusapia Paladino I had a square table made measuring one metre each way and one metre high. The legs were pointed so that it would be difficult to raise it with the foot. When Ochorowicz and I saw the table brought by the joiner, we thought it much too heavy (forty-four pounds), but we tried it the same evening. As soon as Eusapia touched this heavy table with the tips of her fingers, it tilted, swaying about, and without the legs being touched at all, it rose up completely with all four feet off the ground. All hypotheses that attempt to explain this by normal mechanics are absurd. There were no hooks or cords. The thing took place in half-light and we held Eusapia's hands and head.

I shall not, however, base any conclusions on these mysterious experiences in which there is even a light contact by the medium; for it is too difficult to differentiate between effects that are due to normal muscular force and those which proceed from metapsychic causes. The principle adopted in these studies is that the normal explanation of every phenomenon is to be adopted unless radically impossible; therefore at the risk of an exaggerated scepticism I shall assume that in all cases when the hands of the medium or sitters touch the table at all, however lightly, the movements are due to unconscious muscular movements.

It is nevertheless probable that in many cases these movements are mainly due to metapsychic forces; but it is impossible to differentiate accurately between the one cause and the other. If there is any contact between hands and table, any other cause than the muscular movements of the medium must be set aside; but when there is movement without any contact at all, then we have true telekinesis. Not tables only, but many other objects are displaced, and sometimes moved from one place to another. I shall give many instances of this, but before entering on such cases, I wish to indicate briefly the conditions under which alone experimentation gives valid results.

Nearly always these movements take place in darkness, and precautions against fraud must be specially severe. There is the more reason to apprehend fraud that the movement of objects without contact is a comparatively rare phenomenon and almost entirely confined to professional mediums.

Subjective phenomena often occur among persons who do not use their powers as a trade, and therefore it is likely that they do not deceive; but as soon as a medium is sufficiently powerful to obtain movements without contact, he is naturally tempted to make a profession of his mediumship, and then the temptation to fraud is often well-nigh irresistible. This is the more likely because, as has already been explained, the medium in trance is often unable to distinguish between muscular movements and metapsychic phenomena. The mental state is abnormal; and in the course of an experiment mediums lose a part of their moral responsibility, their moral consciousness is attenuated, even when, as in Eusapia's case, their good faith in the normal state is obvious.

Hence, in complete darkness, surrounded by credulous and often igriorant persons, partly unconscious of the position of her limbs, the medium is led to trick, to move things with her hands, while claiming, possibly without intention to deceive, that she has not touched them.

There must, therefore, be absolute certainty that the hands, feet, and head of the medium have been so held as to make any superfluous movement impossible. Tireless vigilance and long practice are necessary to this certainty, for some mediums are in continual movement; their hands are never still. Eusapia, the typica1 medium for telekinesis, was never still for a moment, and it was necessary to watch that her hands were never free; for as soon as one hand escaped from control she made forbidden movements and attributed to "fluidic hands" effects that were only due to normal muscular movements.

Sometimes, instead of the medium's hands being held, her hands and feet are strongly tied. Sometimes she is placed in sewn-up garments; sometimes a thread is fastened to the finger-nails, or the knots of thread with which the hands are tied are sealed with wax. All these are useful precautions to be adopted according to the nature of the experiment and the psychology of the medium.

It must not, however, be forgotten that although these precautions are indispensable, they tend to reduce the phenomena. Certitude is increased but results are diminished. If very effective seances are wanted, the medium must be left comparatively free. Just as in subjective experiments credulity and blind confidence on the part of the sitters increase the phenomena, so in objective experiments, if the medium is straightly tied up and rigid control exercised, very often the results are slight.

This fact, which I have often observed, will cause sceptics to smile; but yet I think that in this case the sceptics are wrong, and that it is often well to leave the medium comparatively free. But, of course, in such cases unwearied vigilance must be exercised on all that takes place; everything must be closely observed, nothing taken for granted, and the inferences finally drawn must be as rigorous as the conditions of the experiment are lenient.

The best method seems to be: first to leave the medium entirely free so that there may be plenty of facts to judge by, then at the next sitting to impose such checks as seem necessary, and at each successive trial to make the restrictions more and more severe so that in the end it becomes impossible to attribute the movements to normal muscular action. Above all, experiments must be repeated and varied.

A most valuable method of check is by flashlight photography,

the camera being f ocussed in advance; the exact position of the medium and the displaced object are then clearly revealed.

The medium should, I think, be always warned that a photograph may be taken and even that it will be taken. There is a risk of injury to the health or the faculties of the medium by the sudden and unexpected glare of the magnesium light, during trance.

I have scruples (perhaps exaggerated) about surprising or deceiving the mediums. No doubt, in certain cases, when there is strong proof of the likelihood of fraud prepared in advance, it is allowable to use the flashlight for detection; but as a general principle I think that mediums should be treated with humanity, and that the same good faith should be observed towards them that we expect from them.

Sceptics often put forward an objection that the average man considers final: "Why darkness? If you get nothing in the light it is because the medium uses the darkness for trickery. When you can produce the phenomena in full daylight or in good light I will believe them; till then I shall think everything to be trickery."

This objection is valueless, for two reasons:

1. It seems proved that many phenomena of telekinesis, if not all, do not take place in full light. Everything happens as though darkness were one of the necessary conditions for the manifestation of the power. This is not absurd; there are many physical phenomena that do not take place in the light, as there are others that do not take place in the dark. If a sceptic On photography were to object to the feeble red light by which plates are developed, the photographer could reply that light interferes with the development. So likewise the experimentalist has the right to reply that light interferes with telekinesis.

2. The second reason why the objection is not valid, is that with some mediums, notably with D. D. Home, the movements have been observed in full light, and in very many other cases the darkness has not been so great as to prevent quite satisfactory visual control.



(b) On Some Cases of Experimental Telekinesis

The phenomena here following are extremely interesting not only in themselves, but because they are of old standing: John W. Edmunds, a lawyer of reputation and a Supreme Court

Judge, began his enquiries in January, 1851. Not till April, 1853, was he convinced of the reality of the phenomena. He says, "I had recourse to every expedient I could think of to discover imposture and to guard against trickery.... I have seen a mahogany table, with a central pillar and carrying a lighted lamp, rise at least a foot above the floor in spite of the efforts of those present to prevent it.... I have seen a mahogany chair turn on its side and move backwards and forwards along the floor without being touched by anyone, in a room where at least a dozen persons were sitting, without any of them being touched by it. It often stopped a few inches from me, having been moved so quickly that had it not stopped, my leg would have been much bruised" (A. R. Wallace, Miracles and Modern Spiritualism).

We will now consider a few experiments with certain persons that prove movement without contact.1

