Mme. Suzanne Bonnefoy, whom I knew as an intelligent and large-hearted woman, relates that at Cherbourg in 1902, she received a telegram telling her of the death of her husband's mother, Mme. Bonnefoy, at Marseilles. Dr. Bonnefoy had then been twenty-four hours in hospital, and when he heard the sad news, he said, "My mother must have died about ten o'clock last evening, for when half awake in my bed here, it seemed to me that someone kissed me; I even said aloud, Ts it you, Suzanne?' Although entirely sceptical on metapsychic matters Dr. Bonnefoy was convinced that there was some relation between his very definite feeling and the death of his mother. The exact agreement in time was verified (La Mort et son Mystere,

ii, p. 333).

Dr. Auguste Manceau, of Paris, saw in a dream the form of an aunt who was very dear to him. She was very old but in quite good health. The shape was not very clear, but he says no doubt was possible, the vision was not like a picture but — "an image formed by light." He sent a telegram and found she had died at the hour of the dream (Flammarion, loc. cit., ii, 408).

The husband of Mme. Belot, of Montpellier, was in Algeria. One day at 4 p.m. she was dozing and it seemed to her that she saw her husband, looking pale and thin, who said, "Good-bye, I am going." The next day she learned by telegram that he had passed away at that hour (Flammarion, loc. cit., ii, 355).

In 1893, Captain Moureau was at sea off the Antilles, and went to his cabin about 11 p.m. Just as he was going to sleep he felt distinctly a weight on his chest like a child's body, felt the two arms round his neck and a kiss on his lips. He pushed the body away and lit a match, but saw no one. He told his experience to a friend next morning and on arriving at Gibraltar learned that his little child, aged two, had died that night of diphtheria (A. S. P., 1919, 71).

M. X., of Moutiers (Vendee), dreamt that he went to his parents, and saw in their room an improvised bed on trestles, with a number of persons standing round, that he passed through them and saw his father's body on the mattress. He woke sobbing and told his wife. The vision corresponded exactly with the facts (Flammarion, 340).

M. Contamine, at Commentry, while dressing, saw in the mirror his door open and one of his friends enter in evening dress. He turned round, much surprised, and saw nothing. He asked the servant who was on the stairs, but she had seen no one. This friend had killed himself that same hour, being in evening dress (Flammarion, loc. cit., 340).

The naval captain E. P. N. writes: "On the 9th of January, 1892, sleeping at Toulon, I was waked by someone, and saw Admiral Peyron standing by my bed with his hands in his pockets. He pushed his body against me and said, 'Good-bye, P., I come to bid you good-bye.' I got up and lit a candle but the apparition was no longer there; but I had hardly begun to go to sleep again when the same thing recurred; only then the form became veiled in cloud and disappeared like a vapor."

Captain N. was serving under Admiral Peyron, who was very ill and died that night. Fleet Engineer G. had the same vision in a dream that same night. Admiral Peyron appeared to him, saying, "My dear G., the time has come to part; we all have to go that way. Good-bye." The cryptesthetic character of this double monition is not nullified by the fact that both Captain N. and the chief engineer knew the admiral to be very ill (Flammarion, 273).

Mme. Suzanne Ollendorff, the wife of my excellent friend, Paul Ollendorff, relates that one morning she suddenly thought of an aunt of hers, and said to herself, "She is dead and the priest of her parish is coming to tell me so." Paul Ollendorff, who was not then married to Suzanne L., went to see her that day and she told him the dream saying, "If the parish priest of X. were at the door now, I should not be surprised." Paul continued sceptical, but during the day (he was then editor of the journal Gil Bias) he received a visit from the priest who told him of the lady's death by cerebral congestion (Flammarion, 273).

Mr. Leadbater says that his friend, Mr. X., in whom he has entire confidence, had a very clear hallucination, repeated three times the same night: he saw his father's form by the light of a bright fire burning in his room, first at 10.30, then again at midnight, and once more at 1.50 a.m. He tried to touch the apparition but his hands met empty air, and the vision gradually disappeared. His father died that night, the death-spasms beginning at 10.30 and ending at midnight (Flammarion, 330).



Conclusions

We have now reached the end of this long list of facts. It is decisive, for all these monitions, apparitions, and powerful sensations cannot be explained by mental hallucination of the perfectly normal persons who relate them. It would also be equally inept to refer them to a long series of chance coincidences.

It is therefore well established that at the moment of death some vibration takes place, moving something in nature, which occasionally gives information of the death to those who are sensitive. That is cryptesthesia, an unusual and supernormal faculty peculiar to sensitives.

It generally takes an auditory or visual form, but most probably the vision itself is a hallucinatory symbol. A. dies and the notion of his death reaches B.'s subconsciousness. But in order that B. may understand, the creative power of subconscious imagination elaborates a phantom resembling A. more or less and surrounds the vision, which is really internal though seemingly external, with detail which may be symbolical or veridical, just as occurs in delirium and in dreams.

We may provisionally suppose that death being a more moving event than the facts of daily life, it sets in motion a stronger vibration than the latter. Let us, therefore, admit the fact of cryptesthesia, but go no further; let us simply say: A.'s death is a reality, B., by his cryptesthetic faculty, perceives that fact and represents it under the symbolical forms to which alone our intelligence is open.

This involves no theory, and proposes no hypothesis; it merely states the adaptation of B.'s cryptesthesia power to the external fact of A.'s death.

It is obvious that the veridical monitions of death strongly confirm all that has been said above on experimental cryptesthesia. If those experiments left any doubt on the mind, the mass of observed fact should dispel it. Human cognition is not limited to the mechanism of the ordinary senses; there is a cryptesthetic sense — a mysterious faculty of cognition.

Let us, however, attempt a preliminary analysis. Does the will of the dying play any part?

If so, the thought of A., dying, would be directed to his friend, B., to whom he has perhaps promised to appear; and this thought, moving in space, would influence B.'s thought.

The simple explanation that first occurs to everyone is that A. has himself appeared in his "astral body." This hypothesis is difficult to sustain, for in many cases the monition is not given by the apparition of the deceased, but by a third person who has been present at the death.1

Sometimes details are apparent that the dying person could not know, so that the inference seems to be that there is cognition of a fact, whether by a symbol, or by a phantom, the phantom itself being symbolical.

It would, therefore, seem most probable that the human soul — the intelligence of the percipient — is moved by some power that reveals the truth or a fragment of the truth; but it is very hard to know whether this truth is announced by an intelligence that wills to convey it, or whether it results only from vibrations set in motion by the events.

If, instead of confining oneself to the study of instances, we analyze them as a whole, we are often led to think that there seems to be an intention in them, an effort to make the facts understood, and therefore, that they present themselves under symbolical forms. But to attribute such an intention to things

lVoy. Mme. A. Sidgwick, /. S. P. R., November, 1906, 321. Case L. 1153 et Phantasms of the Liv., i, 357 et P. S. P. R., x, 261.

is perhaps an anthropomorphic mode of reasoning; as when a peasant whose crops are perishing from drought sees the act of a compassionate Deity in the welcome rain.

Nevertheless it is difficult to explain some collective monitions, some premonitions, and some phenomena of haunting, without seeing in them an effort by an exterior power to reveal a fragment of truth only realizable to our defective intelligence by some representation symbolical of the fact itself.

Frequently there is actually a vague intention on the part of A. that is perceived by B. Jeanne when dying calls on Mile. X. and dies, saying, "If it were to go and see.. " and X. hears herself called.

Mr. Dickinson is preoccupied about his portrait while seriously ill, and his double visits the photographer. Mr. Noell's sister, when dying, calls vehemently on her brother. Jim had promised to visit Mrs. Bishop at his death. The Rev. Field hears his mother call, "Harry, Harry," from her death-bed. Mr. D.'s workman is concerned to justify his conduct.

On the other hand, there are very many cases in which the phantom (cryptesthetic symbol) has appeared to uninterested persons. Mrs. Green was not interested in the Australian niece whom she had never seen. When the Duke of Orleans died he was certainly not thinking of Mine. Bremon; nor Robespierre of Mme. X. When M. Halle saw the cabman's little girl fall from the window the child certainly did not wish to communicate with him, any more than Mr. Phibb's dog with his master.

We are wandering in the darkness, and it seems wise to reserve judgment. Let us say only that in most cases the monition does not seem to be intentional on the part of A., and that the notion of A.'s death reaches B. because it is a reality; his cryptesthesia perceiving that reality.

To decline to admit the intention of the dying and the intervention of the astral body is not to maim the facts; it is only a refusal to go beyond them. It is quite possible that some day, when metapsychics is more advanced, we may come to admit telepathy from the dying to the living; no one can foresee what future science may reveal to our grandchildren, but as yet no one is justified in making gratuitous assumptions or frail theories.

Let us remain within the boundary of indisputable facts — that the death of a human being is often known to other human beings by means outside the action of the normal senses; that this monition of death is shown by a great variety of symbolism, and that monitions are nearly always entirely subjective, although in exceptional cases they seem really to have objective reality.

Such are the inferences that flow from monitions of death; but, as Geley, Bozzano, and Lodge rightly point out, explanations that cover a series of facts are insufficient, if they apply to that series only. All must be coherent. No theory can be built on monitions of death, or on cryptesthesia, or on ectoplasmic forms, each taken by itself. Any satisfactory theory must be applicable to all the facts, at least in some degree. Any general conclusion must therefore be deferred till all the facts have been examined.



IV. Collective Monitions

Collective monitions seldom take place.

Before studying these we shall show that some non-collective monitions perceived by one person only have occurred under conditions such that if there had been any external physical phenomenon it must have been perceived by others present. Such monitions are therefore indisputably subjective. And as it is most important that the exact meaning of the terms "objective" and "subjective" in metapsychic science should be clearly understood, I return to this matter.

The light of a rocket and the sound of a gunshot are objective;. they can be mechanically recorded.

That a monition should be produced at all there must necessarily be some vibration of surrounding forces, and some exterior fact to produce it. But this objective phenomenon that starts sensation in a sensitive is not objective in the same way as the vibration of the air that produces sound, or that of the ether that produces light; it is a special kind of objectivity whose nature is quite unknown, and it has the peculiar property of acting only on certain individuals and not on any physical apparatus.

When Mrs. Thompson, taking my son's watch, says, "Three generations mingled," there is doubtless some vibration that has given her this knowledge, but no other person could have perceived it.

The sensibility of individuals to cryptesthesia may vary as 1: 100,000, whereas their sensibilities to sounds, colours, lights, and odours may be as 10,000 to 10,001.

This is not all. When a vision appears to B., and he thinks he sees A., it is not proved that the form A. that B. thinks he sees is A., in the ordinary meaning of seeing. All we can say is that he has the notion of A., and that he interprets this objectively as A. Something that calls up A. in his mind reaches him; but what is it precisely? The transformation of the vague notion of A. into a visual image of A. is an entirely subjective phenomenon.

There is no hypothesis here; it is mere fact. In some wellauthenticated cases B. has been surrounded by persons who see nothing where B. sees something distinctly. Therefore B.'s perception has been subjective in the ordinary sense of the word.

I give below some instances which should have been collective if the phenomenon had not been entirely subjective.

Mrs. Taunton at a concert saw the apparition of her Uncle W. between her and the orchestra. She did not know of his illness, but he seemed to be lying in bed and calling her as if dying. The apparition was not vaporous, but yet she could see the orchestra through it. Her husband asked her why she was " fascinated" in that way. The vision disappeared, and after the concert Mrs. T. narrated what she had seen. Mr. W. died at the exact hour of the vision.

Mrs. Purton hears a terrible cry and anguished moanings that filled the house. She wakes up, terrified, goes over the whole house, but finds all quiet and everyone sleeping. In the morning she asks if anyone has heard an unusual noise, but no one has. A few days later comes the news of the drowning of her son Frank coming from Australia in the Royal Charter, lost with all passengers at the hour of the monition.

Mr. King, of the Royal Military College, returning home with his friends through the country at 10 p.m., says suddenly, "Look there, look there,,, pointing to a part of the wood. His friend M. could see nothing. King fell to the ground groaning and got up as if he were intoxicated. Then he cried out, "Where are they carrying her? I say they are carrying her." The next morning he could remember nothing of all this; but he found that an old lady of whom he was very fond had died of heart disease at 10 p.m. precisely (Tel. Halluc, 247).

Bertha Hurly frequently went to visit Mrs. Evans, an old woman who was ill but in no immediate danger. One evening at table she saw a form dressed like Mrs. Evans cross the room and disappear. "I said, 'Who is that?' and my mother replied, What is the matter with you?' I said, That woman who went from one door to the other was Mrs. Evans/ They all laughed at me." At that hour Mrs. Evans was in delirium and died the next morning at eight o'clock.

Mr. B., taking tea with his son and his son's wife, said suddenly, "Who is looking in at the window?" No one could have got up to that particular window, but Mr. B. insisted that he had seen the face of a pale woman with dark hair. He was quieted only when they had gone round the house and found no one. The time was 5:45 p.m., and Mrs. B.'s mother died in Guernsey at that same hour (Tel. Halluc., 180).

Mr. Mouat, on reaching his office, saw an employee speaking to the porter and also the Rev. Mr. H. standing at the door. The clergyman, who worked at the same office, did not usually arrive so early. Another clerk coming down the stairs also saw Mr. H., and went out without getting any answer from him to a jesting remark. Mr. Mouat, being left alone with Mr. H., looked straight at him, was surprised at his melancholy expression, and remarked that he was wearing no cravat. "What is the matter?" he said, "You seem troubled." H. made no reply but continued to look steadily. At this moment the clerk returned, but saw nothing, and H. disappeared. On the one hand it is averred that neither the clerk nor the porter saw H., and on the other, that H. was out of London on that day (Tel. Halluc., 358).

This case is more perplexing than the others, for two persons out of four saw Mr. H. and spoke to him, while two others saw nothing. The materialization (to adopt this word provisionally) only seemed to be such to two persons. It was therefore not an objective fact, or rather it belonged to both categories.



(a) Collective Monitions, Non-simultaneous and Non-identical

The metaphor of a human race devoid of the sense of smell will enable us to understand somewhat better the significance of these mysterious phenomena.

Let us suppose that a gust of wind brings a whiff of violets to twenty of these persons in a room. None of them will perceive anything. But if one among them has the sense of smell for a few seconds, he will get the notion of violets.

If now the same odoriferous breeze brings the same scent to another exceptionally sensitive person near by, that person will also have the notion of violets, alone among others there present. This would be a collective but non-simultaneous monition; and we may compare individuals endowed with permanent or transient cryptesthesia to persons endowed with the sense of smell among those devoid of it.

Mrs. Hunter, awake, and in the daytime, sees a large coffin on the bed, and an old woman, tall and stout, at the foot of the bed, looking at the coffin. The vision was so clear that she could describe the clothing.

The figure vanished and Mrs. Hunter related the fact to those who visited her. That evening the governess came in very frightened, saying that she had seen an old woman in the sittingroom who seemed to dissolve as she looked at her; and described the dress just as Mrs. Hunter had seen it. Mrs. Hunter's little girl of five, pointing at a part of the room where her nurse saw nothing, cried out, "Go away, go away! Naughty ugly old woman" (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 631).

The Rev. Mr. Jupp, director of an orphanage, waking in the middle of the night, saw a light in the dormitory. A small luminous cloud floated over the bed of one of the children. He sat up and looked at his watch, it was 12.55, and was about to get up to touch this strange light, when he "felt rather than heard" the injunction, "Remain in bed, you will suffer no hurt." He went to sleep again. In the morning the child over whose bed the light had been, said to him, "My mother came to me last night; did you see her?" The child was four years old; his mother had been dead six months.

Three brothers Swithinbank, though living apart from each other, had the same dream on the same night, that their mother was dying; she not being ill at the time (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 382).

Miss Beale sees a man in a flowing dressing-gown enter her room; and the same night, C, in an adjoining room, also sees an apparition, which he recognized.

Mrs. Treloar, entering her room at 8 p.m., sees on the further side of the bed a woman's figure, very pale and with an expression of suffering, wearing a hat and light cloak. The lamplight on the face showed even the freckles on the nose. Mrs. T. recognized her sister who gradually disappeared. Just then Mrs. TVs little niece ran in, saying, "I have seen Aunt Annie, I have seen Aunt Annie." This apparition does not coincide with the hour of death, but with an attack of acute diphtheria that carried her off in twenty-four hours (Tel. Halluc, 290).

Popular superstitions and beliefs or religious legends carry little or no weight with me; but perhaps they should not all be dismissed without consideration. The extraordinary facts related in the lives of the saints are neither complete falsehoods nor absolute errors, as, for instance, levitations. There is probably some amount of truth imbedded in all such tales. But it is better to try new experiments and make fresh observations than to search for whatever small amount of truth these legends may contain or than to deny them altogether.

Many popular superstitions exist relative to movements and noises relating to deaths. There are many tales resembling monitions, but the events chronicled — breakage of mirrors, falling of pictures, blows on the doors, etc., presaging death or disaster — are rarely such as to carry recognition. I will merely mention a few of these monitions; for even though there be no recognition, one can, and even ought, to give weight to the coincidences.

M. Jaffe, at Berlin, in bed about midnight, but perfectly awake, hears the ticking of the "death-watch." He got up, and heard the raps follow him to different parts of the room. The next morning his wife said to him, "I saw your mother in a dream with a handkerchief tied under her chin; her mouth was much contorted." Soon after, M. Jaffe heard of his mother's death, accompanied by such strong contortions of the face that it became necessary to tie up the jaw by a handkerchief passing round the chin.

M. Lemonnier, chemist at Rennes, had two intimate friends, M. Escolan and M. Nivot, a surgeon-dentist. M. Escolan, who was in feeble health, was attacked by acute tuberculosis and was taken to the hospital. One morning in September, 1891, at 5.45 a.m., M. Lemonnier was awaked by violent blows on the shutters of his pharmacy. He writes: "I thought, 'Who can it be who knocks like this instead of using the night-bell?' for he was drumming on the shutters for one or two minutes. I dressed in haste and went to open. There were only a few women sweeping in the street, who said they had seen no one.,,

About an hour later his friend M. Nivot came at seven o'clock, who said, "A singular thing has occurred; at 5.45 I was awakened by knocking on the door of my room, and I called out, 'Who is there? Don't knock so hard, I am not deaf.' The noise continued, I opened the door. There was no one, and the house was asleep; the porter also said that no one had entered the house."

M. Lemonnier and M. Nivot then thought that their friend had died in the hospital. They went there and found that he had passed away at 5.45 exactly.

Miss Matthews woke in the middle of the night and saw, to her great alarm, a young girl, Suzanne, a housemaid like herself, who had left the house some months previously. "She was in night-attire, came straight to my bed, lifted the clothes, and lay down by my side. I felt a cold shiver, and I think I fainted. When I came to myself the apparition had gone; but I am sure it was no dream." The same night the son of Mr. Matthews who lived with his mother felt a great terror. He looked, but could see nothing, hid his head under the bedclothes and could not sleep. Suzanne, who was in hospital for liver trouble that did not seem very serious, died that night (Tel. Halluc., 350).

Mrs. Beilby relates that she and her husband heard one day the voice of one of their young friends calling, "Jonnny> Johnny." This young friend, Miss Snell, who was living in their house in Victoria (Australia) had gone for a ride, and had met with a serious accident about seven miles away. She had called out to Johnny for help, the boy who usually rode with her. The impression was so clear that Mr. and Mrs. Beilby called the servants (Tel. Halluc., 363).

The Rev. Mr. Tweedale, of the Astronomical Society of London, on January 10, 1879, saw his grandmother in the middle of the night. The apparition lasted several seconds. She was wearing a cap of antiquated make. His father, Mr. Tweedale, also saw the same apparition at his bedside. The sister of Mr. Tweedale senior, eighteen miles away, saw the same apparition at 2

A.M., the hour being exactly noted. The vision of the Rev. Mr. Tweedale was at 2.10 a.m. The grandmother had died at 12.15 (A. S. P., 1906, 610).

During the night in which X., a cousin of my children, poisoned himself with strychnine, my son George, aged twenty, and my daughter Louise, aged eighteen, told their impressions at breakfast. Said George, "I had a dismal dream. I dreamed that one of my friends had died. I hope it is not X. or Y. But it can't be either." "I, too," said Louise, "dreamed that our cousin P. A. was dead, and that I said to my brother Jacques, 'He cannot possibly be dead, you went with him to the opera/ " Now P. A. holds the same degree of relationship to my children as does X.; and X. had been to the theatre with Jacques on the previous evening.

Mrs. Young, taking tea with her husband and children, heard a violent noise on the floor above. She also seemed to feel a strong wind. Her husband heard and felt nothing. Far away, Mrs. Young's brother, Captain Adams, then at sea, heard himself called, "John, John," and knew his father's voice. He went on deck, but no one had called him. At that time Mr. Adams, their father, perished in a shipwreck {Phantasms of the Living, ii, 632).



(b) Simultaneous and Collective Monitions

Monitions of this group are of fundamental importance; first, because they strongly confirm the hypothesis of cryptesthesia, and secondly because they seem to show that in certain cases the monition assumes a normal objectivity, like a real materialization.

The following is an old story which may be considered exact in the main, despite the deformations that time often brings when the full details are not written down:

In the island of Cape Breton (Nova Scotia) Colonel Wynyard and Sir John Sherbrooke were dining in barracks, when a form, simply dressed, passed before them. "God bless my soul," said Sherbrooke, "who is that?" "It is my father, I am sure he is dead," Colonel Wynyard replied. The two officers verified that no one could have come in, and the occurrence was noted down in the regimental archives. Shortly after news came that Colonel Wynyard's father had been killed in the hunting-field.

Sir John Sherbrooke had never seen John Wynyard, but one day in London he met a man who strongly resembled him and was often mistaken for him. Sherbrooke said, "That is the man I saw" (Tel. Halluc, 383).

Mrs. E. Wickham went daily to the hospital in Malta to visit an officer, Mr. B., wounded at Tel-el-Kebir. The wound became gangrenous and death was imminent; though not being expected that night, Mrs. Wickham consented to go home. About 3 a.m. her young son, aged nine, called her, crying out, "Mother, mother, here is Mr. B." Mrs. Wickham writes: "I got up in a hurry; the form of Mr. B. was floating in the room about six inches above the floor, and disappeared through the window, smiling at me. He was in night-attire, but the gangrened foot seemed to me like the other; both my boy and I remarked this. Half an hour later they came to tell me that B. had died (Phantasms of the living; quoted by Flammarion). This case is one of the most remarkable on record.

Several years ago, Mme. de Barreau, a lady of high character and serene disposition, told me a similar fact witnessed by herself. I unfortunately did not note it down at the time, but the story struck me so powerfully that the main facts can be relied on.

Mme. de Barreau was tending a girl friend who was very ill. The house was in the country and somewhat lonely, facing a meadow through which there ran a brook bordered by willows. The girl was dying and her mother and a professional nurse were with her. The sick-room was on the ground floor, that of Mme. de Barreau on the first story. One night, after watching some time, Mme. de Barreau and the nurse went upstairs to take some rest, and some time later both of them, looking out of the window, saw a white form float among the trees and vanish into the darkness. Just then the death took place.

Mrs. Pearson and her sister, Mrs. Coppinger, were watching at the bedside of their dying aunt, Mrs. Harriet. Suddenly Mrs. Coppinger said, "Look, Emma, there is Aunt Anna." The two sisters than saw a little old woman wearing a shawl and an oldfashioned hat entering the sick-room. This Aunt Anna was a deceased sister; before her death Mrs. Harriet said that she had seen this sister who came to call her (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1906, 164).

Commander Aylesbury, being then a boy of thirteen, narrowly escaped drowning and in his distress called loudly on his mother. On the same day at a distance of some 6,000 miles (Batavia to London) his mother and three sisters were working in their room. All heard a faint cry, "Mother!" The girls said, "Did you hear? Some one cried 'Mother!' " The voice called twice more, quickly and as if in distress. They got up and ran out into the street. All was quiet and the weather very calm. Mrs. Aylesbury noted the date in her diary. The time corresponded, so far as can be judged after thirty years and in the absence of other written confirmation (Tel. Halluc, 365).

In October, 1916, Mme. R., of Montlugon, heard a cry of distress, "Mother." She hurried to her boy's room and found that he also had been startled by the same cry very clearly heard. Two days later they learned that another son had been wounded that night (Unpublished, M. Mialaret).

Mrs. P., before going to bed, saw a man in a naval uniform, with his elbow on the foot-rail of the bed, looking at her husband who was sleeping. Mrs. P. woke her husband, who saw the apparition, and cried out in astonishment, "Sir, what are you doing here?" The form stood up and said, ''Willy, Willy," in an imperious voice. This was Mr. P.'s Christian name. He got up to eject the stranger, but the form moved impassively across the room, throwing a shadow on the wall (there being light in the room), and disappeared through the partition. The door was bolted. Mr. P. recognized his father who had been a naval officer in his youth, whom Mrs. P. did not know. Mr. P. died shortly after (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1909, xix, 326).

Mrs. Bettany dreamt that one of her neighbors, Mrs. J., whom she knew by name only, and who was not ill, had died. The dream was so clear that she sent next morning to enquire for Mrs. J., and found that she had really died during the night. One of Mrs. Bettany's servants also had a terrible dream that night in which some one told her that Mrs. J. was dead.

The following case is interesting from several points of view. M. Sully-Prudhomme and I were able to gather all the authenticating documents. Captain Mangot, commanding the three-master Jacques Gabriel, outward bound, Bordeaux to Mauritius, notes in the ship's log, July 17, 1852, that he and his second officer, M. Penaud, walking on the poop, heard a woman's voice. The steersman also heard it. He says, "On arriving at Mauritius we heard of the death of M. Penaud's wife, who died on the same day and hour at which the voice was heard. M. Penaud told me that he had had a presentiment of misfortune, adding that each time he had lost one of his family a similar warning had occurred." Later on the captain added that the cry he had heard was heart-rending, and the fact impressed him so much that he often spoke of it.

The ship left Bordeaux on April 16th, and the death of Mme. Penaud took place, not on the 17th of July, but on the 16th of June, according to the register of deaths at Paimbceuf. There is, therefore, a manifest error in the statement of dates in the logbook. The voice was not heard on the day of the death, but a month later. Still, the fact remains that a woman's voice, strong and clear, was heard by three persons on a ship at sea.

Mr. Falkinburg, returning home at 7 p.m., was playing with his little boy aged five, when suddenly the child exclaimed, "Papa, here is grandpapa." Mr. Falkinburg came and saw the very lifelike figure of his father. Mrs. Falkinburg, however, could see nothing, and tried to persuade her husband that it must be an illusion. At ten o'clock, the child, then in his bed, called again, "Papa, grandpapa is here." Mr. Falkinburg had died at 7.14 exactly.

This monition though collective cannot be objective, since it was invisible to the third person present. It is open to question whether collective monitions seen by several persons have really the objectivity that they would seem to have, using the word "objectivity" in its usual sense.

Mme. Focke at Diisseldorf, was taking tea with her daughters, when she heard a cry, "Mother, Mother!" Her daughters and Mme. Haskel, who was with her, heard the same cry, and the voice was recognized as that of Anna Focke, another daughter. They went to the window but could see no one. Anna Focke had embarked for the Indies on a Dutch boat which was lost that night with all hands (Phantasms of the Living).

Professor Knes and Dr. Obersteiner, well-known physicians of Vienna, were together at the house of the latter, and heard a knock at the door. They cried, "Come in," but no one entered. A few moments later they heard the door of the antechamber open, and some footsteps, light, but distinct. Obersteiner opened the door but saw no one. A third time they heard the further door opening, the light footsteps and the knock on their door, and Dr. Obersteiner exclaimed, "This is really too much I" At that time Mme. S., the sick lady whom they were going to see in consultation, was dying. She had died when they reached the house (A. S. P., 1891, i, 162).

Mme. B., at the bedside of her dying mother, saw the phantom of her godmother, an old governess long since dead, sitting by the fire in her mother's usual place. She gave a cry, her sister came, she and three other persons saw the phantom (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1906, 166).

One night, Mrs. L., sleeping at her husband's side, heard clearly the voice of their son. Both woke up completely. The voice said, "As I cannot come home to England, mother, I am come to see you." They took note of the incident and some days later learned of their son's death (Tel. Halluc, 364).

Maria Strieffert, schoolmistress, heard distinctly the word "Fraulein." Two pupils with her also heard it. She knew it for the voice of a person who had behaved badly to her. Having noted the time, it was verified that this person had died at that moment. The case is not very evidential (Flammarion, 323).

Mme. Telechoff was in her sitting-room in Petersburg with her five children and her dog Moustache. The dog suddenly began to bark, and all present then saw a small boy about six years old, dressed in a shirt, whom they recognized as the child of the milkwoman. They knew this child to be ill. The apparition left the stove, passed over the heads of the persons present, and disappeared by the open window after lasting about fifteen seconds. The dog followed its movements, barking all the while. The child died at the same hour (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 439).

Philip Weld, a boy of fifteen, was accidentally drowned on April 16, 1845. Mr. Cox, the master of his school, went to the boy's father to give the sad news personally; but as soon as he entered, Mr. Weld said, "You need not tell me, I know that Philip is dead. My daughter Catherine and I saw him on the road, and by him a young man dressed in black. I could see, through their forms, a peasant working in the fields. I have said nothing about it so as not to alarm my wife" (Tel. Halluc., 376).

Mme. Obalecheff, at Odessa, was lying in bed with her infant; her servant Claudine was sleeping on a mattress beside her on the floor. Raising her eyes she saw her father-in-law slowly enter, wearing bedroom slippers and a plaid pattern dressinggown that Mme. Obalecheff had never seen. He stepped over the feet of the servant and sat down in an armchair. The clock struck eleven. "Being quite sure that I was looking at my father-in-law, I said to the servant, 'Look, Claudine, I do not know him/ Claudine, trembling with fright, said, 'I see Nicolas Nilovitch' (my father-in-law's name). He then got up, again stepped over the servant's feet, and vanished." The lady went to call her husband; they went through the flat but found no one. Mr. Nilovitch died at Yver at that time (Flammarion, 194).

Mrs. Paget was at prayers with her daughters one evening about 11 p.m. when the three of them heard the heavy steps of a man in the passage. The steps stopped at the end of the corridor where there was a gas-jet, and then went away. Mrs. Paget opened the door, and said, "He has not put out the gas; how his step resembled that of poor Arthur!" This Arthur was an old and faithful servant whom Mrs. Paget had sent to Ventnor for a rest. She knew him to be ill, but thought him in no immediate danger. Before hearing the steps, Mrs. Paget had remarked, "Since poor Arthur has left us no one has put out the gas punctually." The incident was noted in a diary, and it was proved that no one had entered the passage. Arthur died at Ventnor at the precise time, carefully verified. Just prior to death he asked the time, and one witness affirms that he said, "It is time to put out the gas"; but this is not perfectly certain.

Mme. Weyer and her husband both heard one night three distinct sobs, like those of a dying person. He got up, lit a candle, and sought for the cause of the sound. They went to bed again and the sobbing was repeated. The time was noted as 10.30. There was no recognition, but Mme. Weyer's brother died at the same hour.

Mrs. Elgee, staying in Cairo, slept in a large room of the hotel, having carefully barricaded her door. One night she woke suddenly, as if she had been called, and saw the form of an old friend whom she knew to be in England. "How did you come here?" she asked in astonishment. The form was so distinct that she could see all details of the dress down to three onyx shirt-studs. He came forward and pointed to Mrs. Dennys, who was sleeping in the same room. She woke up and looked at the apparition in great terror. The form then vanished. Mrs.

Dennys was able to describe the vision exactly, but did not recognize it. The person seen by both ladies with all the appearance of life was a Mr. X., who was neither ill nor in danger. Mrs. Elgee met him four years later.

Mrs. Lett entered one of the rooms of her father's house, accompanied by a young girl, Miss Berthon. The gas was alight, and both saw the figure of Mrs. Lett's father, Captain Towns, reflected on the polished surface of a wardrobe. It looked like a life-size portrait. The face was pale and thin, and he seemed to be wearing the grey flannel jacket in which he used habitually to sleep. There was no portrait on the walls. While they continued to look stupefied at this image, another daughter of Captain Towns entered and said, "Why, good God, it is father!" A housemaid also came and said, "It is the master." Graham, the captain's orderly, came, and said, "Lord save us, Mrs. Lett, it is the captain!" They called the steward and Mrs. Crane, and both said that they saw the captain. Then Mrs. Towns, the captain's widow, was called, who, seeing the apparition, put out her hand to touch it; as she passed her hand over the panel the image gradually disappeared.

Dr. Isnard, the son of the well-known military surgeon, who was professor at the Val-de-Grace, while still a medical student, had a vision of a phantom, perceived also by his sister and a friend at the same time. His mother, Mme. Isnard, being then a widow, was seriously ill and had been bedridden for four months in her house in the Rue Jacob at Paris, in 1878. Her bedroom was next to the dining-room. Suddenly the door into the passage opened wide. A gust of wind was felt though all the windows were shut. In the doorway there appeared the shade of a woman of small stature, bent, with bowed head and arms crossed on her breast. She seemed to be wearing a grey and dusty veil. She advanced gently into the room, gliding over the floor and her face could not be seen. She passed close to us, turned by the door and disappeared in the darkness of the passage-way. Mile. Isnard and M. Menou Cornuet saw exactly the same phantom. Mme. Isnard died a few days later (A. S. P., 1891, 193-203).

The very circumstantial evidence given by the three witnesses, none of them at all superstitious, makes it clear that no illusion was possible. This is one of the best cases of collective vision; and its full force can scarcely be realized without reading the whole evidence and the judicious notes that Dariex has added upon them.

To establish the objectivity of a phantom perhaps the best proof, apart from photography, would be the effect on animals. On this there are valuable evidences, collected with much care by Bozzano, who has brought together sixty-nine cases, mostly gathered from the Proceedings and Journals of the S. P. R. After eliminating the stories of phantasmal animals and haunted localities (a very doubtful matter pertaining to haunted houses), there remain thirty-five cases of cryptesthetic perceptions by animals, though the evidential weight to be attached to them is not very great.1

Mme. T., visiting M. and Mme. Yver, was conversing with them on the subject of one of Mme. T.'s relations who had committed suicide. A little terrier at Mme. T.'s feet began to whine and tried to rush to the door; his hair stood up and he tried to escape from his master's hands as if to attack some one. Mme. T., but only she, saw a phantom before the door which she alleged that she recognized as the form of the suicide.

Miss H. E. S., aged eighteen, having risen one summer morning at five o'clock, was lighting the fire to prepare tea, when a big dog with her began to growl and look towards the door. Miss S. then saw a tall, dark figure with shining eyes, that soon disappeared.

Miss K. was petting her kitten on her knees when the animal suddenly showed disquiet, hissed, arched its back, giving all the signs of terror. Miss K. then saw in a chair near her an old hag, ugly and wrinkled, looking maliciously at her. The cat rushed against the door, and Miss K., terrified, called for help. Her mother came, but the phantom had vanished. It had been visible to Miss K. for about five minutes. As soon as the door was opened the cat had fled through. It seems that formerly an old woman had hanged herself in that room.

1To these facts of telekinesis should be added some that may be considered as monitions. Professor Bozzano has published a most interesting article, Dei fenomcni di telekinasia in rapporto con eventi di Morte (Luce e Ombra, 1922, 37s; 1922, 13). Twenty-five cases are reported of which some are very striking. Myers has mentioned some of these in his Human Personality. They resemble some cases on which Flammarion has dwelt — apparitions of the dead to the dying. These monitory and premonitory telekineses and hallucinations should be noted. They do not simplify the problems, but demonstrate once more the mysteries that surround our psychological and physiological life. (Second French edition.)

If it is difficult to admit that collective hallucinations, perceived in common by several persons, are purely objective, it is much more difficult to admit this when animals show perception of an external reality of some kind or other. As Bozzano well says, the signs of fear or anger shown by cats and dogs do not prove that they see the same phantom that is seen by human beings. All the same, they do see something, and this unusual something frightens them.

It is not unlikely that if in such cases a photograph could be taken there might be an image on the plate. This proof would be much more evidential for the objectivity of the phenomenon than the terror of a dog, cat, or horse, which is difficult to verify, still more difficult to analyze, and almost impossible to interpret.



Conclusions

It cannot be supposed that these forms, noises, and phantoms that several persons can see have no mechanical objectivity; and yet rigid and unquestionable proof is lacking. As in all the sciences that depend on observation, the accuracy of the observations is open to question.

Given the strange nature of the phenomena and the consequent need for rigorous demonstration, if we had to depend solely upon collective hallucinations to determine the reality of materialized phantoms we could not venture on a conclusion. But the experiments on materializations are so evidential that they reinforce the observations. On the basis of experimental fact given by materializations (to be studied in detail later on), it may be positively asserted that some collective hallucinations are objective phenomena in the ordinary sense of the word.

Observational methods are not as precise as experimental methods. Cameras, microphones, balances, and galvanometers are not available. The only proof that can be given of a true materialization with mechanical and visible reality, is that the phenomenon has been perceived at the same time and with the same details by several persons. It is highly improbable that two persons should have the same hallucination at the same moment, their good faith and intellectual honesty being admitted, and in the absence of any external suggestion.

A photograph would, of course, carry scientific certainty; but when two reasonable and normal persons describe the same form, exclaim at the same moment, and utter their impressions even while the apparition is still there it would be absurd to suppose an identical wholly subjective hallucination.

When Mr. Weld and his daughter both see Philip Weld walking on the road it is difficult to suppose that no phantom was there. Mr. and Mrs. Beilby both hear Miss Snell call "Johnny, Johnny," and the servants also hear the same voice; it is almost self-evident that there were sonorous vibrations of the air that could have been recorded by a phonograph. When Mrs. Aylesbury and her three daughters hear the cry, "Mother, Mother!" how can this be understood unless the air really conveyed those sounds? The two sons see the form of their father in their cabin, and both their accounts tally, even though at second-hand. How can this concurrent testimony be explained unless there were some single objectifkation?

These collective hallucinations are often monitory, and might be so classified. But certain cases show no lucidity in the percipients, and no recognition; it is just a phantom that some persons have seen and described without connecting it with any external event. The meaning, if any, has not been understood.

Such occurrences can hardly be called monitions; they convey no warning and involve no recognition. Such collective visions belong rather to the chapter on the uncertain and imperfectly studied phenomena of haunted houses.

They constitute a transitional class between metapsychic subjectivity and objectivity.

Collective hallucinations confirm what has already been so often reiterated — that there is a special sensibility perhaps common to all men but certainly existing in some individuals, which conveys notions by other means than the normal senses.

But for this sensibility to come into play there must necessarily be some external radiation; some power hidden in things or in the human soul which finds out the percipient and sets some tracts of his subconsciousness in motion.

We can state nothing as yet either on the nature of such forces or on the modes of the sensibility by which they act, and therefore we must abstain from theorizing.

Nor does this greatly matter! We have no warrant to deny a phenomenon because we do not know its laws. If that were the case we should have to close all scientific books.



Chapter VII. Premonitions



1. On Premonitions in General

We now approach the thorny problem of premonitory cryptesthesia. We may be just able to conceive of extremely piercing sight, or super-acuity of hearing, a sensitiveness to vibrations hidden in things, or the influence of one brain on another, but what are we to say on a knowledge of what is yet to come? Nevertheless, it seems to me that there are numerous and indisputable cases of lucidity that involve a knowledge of future events. Bozzano, who has published an excellent book on premonitions, says, with good reason, that among all the phenomena of lucidity, premonition is the one that has been most effectively proved.

If the long-continued belief of men in all lands and in all times had any scientific value, divination of the future might be reckoned as one of the most positive facts in metapsychics.

But we can definitely affirm the reality of premonitions, not because all ancient writers, whether credulous or not, believed in it, but because many testimonies to it have been obtained in our own day. Oracles were given by the augurs, the sibyls, and the priestesses of Cumse and Delphi; Socrates had a daemon who warned him of dangers by a voice that he distinctly heard. Cicero has written a whole book on divination, but does not discuss whether it exists or not; he descants on its advantages and errors, and he seems to conclude on a fatalistic note, saying it is better to be ignorant of coming evils: ignoratio futurorum malornm utUiorquam scientia est.

We shall not discuss whether a knowledge of the future is or is not desirable, but shall only examine whether it is possible.

At the outset it may be shown that prevision of the future is not so absurd as to warrant rejection a priori.

Let us imagine a man on a high mountain with a first-rate astronomical telescope which shows every detail on the plains. He sees a railway, and at the exit of a tunnel some villains placing a huge stone on the rails. It is 10 a.m., and the train is due there at noon. He knows that B. will travel first class in that train, and he sees the train in the station, and B. entering a first-class carriage in the forepart of the train. He foresees the accident as a result of his momentary vision, and notes down, "In two hours B. will be in a terrible railway accident.,, Suppose the means whereby this knowledge came to him is then effaced from his memory; he will then have a premonition of the future without knowing how he came to have it.

If we knew the totality of things in the present we should know the totality of things to come. Our ignorance of the future is the result of our ignorance of the present.

Laplace, in his Analytical Essay on Probabilities, has said this in precise terms: "An intelligence knowing all the forces of Nature and the respective positions of all beings in it, having also the power of analyzing all the data, would comprehend under one formula the movements of vast masses and of the smallest atoms. Nothing would be uncertain, and the future would be as open to it as the present."

Every future event of whatever kind is the consequence, perhaps the inevitable consequence, of the actual state of things. The present is pregnant of the future, for the future is dependent upon the present. Now, cryptesthesia gives cognitions of realities, even of far-distant realities. We are subconsciously moved by complex vibrations that bring to us complex notions to which our normal psychological life is closed; so that the subconscious knowledge of the present may permit of a rapid perception of its consequences; that is, of things to come.

There is a curious, though very rare, medical fact which enables us to form an idea of what a premonition may be. A photograph taken of a person suffering from a slight attack of fever may show signs of a rash or eruption on the face quite invisible to ordinary sight. The eruption may then be foreseen.

These are but analogies, and scarcely lessen the enormous difficulties of our inability to comprehend the facts. Whatever sketchy theories we may make to explain premonition, they will always be fragile and imperfect; and I shall not dwell on this mystery but shall content myself with showing that premonition is an existing fact. That is all that present science can do.

To permit of our speaking of premonition in the metapsychic sense of the word, three conditions must prevail:

(1) The fact announced must be absolutely independent of the person to whom the premonition has come.

For instance, many cases are known in which A., in a somnambulistic state, announces that he will have some illness, say a syncope, after ten days, a month, or even a year. This is not a metapsychic premonition, for A.'s subconsciousness is fully awake, and is quite able to act on the internal organs and so to bring about the crisis at the predicted time. Such cases belong to hypnotic auto-suggestion.

(2) The announcement must be such that it cannot be ascribed to chance nor to sagacity.

The range of the latter is difficult to determine. An acute mind in possession of the exact facts can to some degree foresee the future event. In an academical election, for instance, he may say. "X. will be elected, and not Y., for M. and N. will both vote for him. O. will not vote, and though Y. counts on M., N., and O., he will have three votes less than he counts on. X. will have 21 votes and Y. only 17." This is only shrewdness. So if a young man is seen to enter a gambling house with two hundred-franc notes it might be said, "In an hour that young man will be cleaned out."

But the predictions of shrewdness, however acute, are not necessarily correct. Y. may be elected in spite of A.'s correct calculations; the young man may possibly win. Genuine premonitions are not due to shrewdness; they are often concerned with minute details that no sagacity could foresee and no chance could account for.

Before we can admit a metapsychic premonition, chance must be completely eliminated.

A. goes to Monte Carlo and, looking at the roulette-table, says, "Red will come up." The probability is 1:2, and if he is right the result is, of course, one of two probabilities. If he says, "7 will come up," and again is right, the probability is 1: 37. But gamesters often have such anticipations which prove correct and they are blind enough to forget the thirty-six cases in which the anticipation failed.

Every alleged premonition is a special case to be studied and analyzed in full detail to eliminate auto-suggestion, perspicacity, and chance.

To show how chance may intervene I will quote the following personal fact which I do not in the least imagine to be a premonition, but consider entirely fortuitous: On the 20th of May, 1918, I was in Paris, and being about to start for the ambulances at the front, I wrote in my pocket diary under the dates May 20th and September 24th, "Finis belli."

On the 20th of May no perspicacity could foresee the end of the war. To all appearances, and my own opinion was in agreement, the war would last another year; but on the 24th of September the Bulgarian armistice was signed, and that date is nearly as important with regard to the end of the war as November 11, 1918, when the general armistice took effect.

If the calculus of probabilities be applied to the above, from the 20th of May, 1918, to the same date a year later, there are 360 days, and since two dates are specified we may put the odds against one of them being right as 2: 360 or 1: 180, a probability fairly comparable to that of predicting that first the ace of hearts and then a club would be drawn from a pack of cards, 1/52 x ^4, say, 1/208. I have no notion why I wrote "Finis belli" under September 24th. I never but once made any similar forecast, and that turned out wrong. It would be absurd to consider this a premonition; it is a mere coincidence, curious enough but fortuitous.

I think that Dr. Conan Doyle's Piavc, to which I shall allude further on, is similarly fortuitous.

(3) The conditions under which the alleged fact has been received and noted down must be examined with the greatest care. Paramnesia — false memory — that leads a person to imagine in all good faith that the event or the landscape that he sees is not new to his eyes, plays strange parts and is sometimes so strong as to lead a person to affirm a premonition when there has been none.

The only answer to this serious objection is that before the alleged prediction is realized it should have been written down., or circumstantially told to two or three persons. If an exact register were kept of dreams supposed to be premonitory, it would be possible to compare the number of those that were verified with those that were not. Several investigators have suggested classifications for premonitions — e.g., Mrs. Sidgwick, F. W. H. Myers, and Bozzano.

Mrs. Sidgwick classes them according to subjective modalities;

Myers on an ascending scale of theoretical import. I shall here follow the classification adopted in previous chapters for monitions; giving, however, one separate section to auto-premonitions, which are subject to some reserves, inasmuch as they may sometimes be explained as being due to auto-suggestion. The classification to be followed will then be: Auto-premonition, (a) of sickness, (b) of accidental death: Real premonitions, (a) under hypnotism, (b) under spiritist conditions, (c) casual premonitions of various kinds.



2. Auto-Premonitions



(a) Of Sickness

Of all kinds of premonitions these are the most questionable, for there is nothing to prove that an act of will — I may even say of unconscious will (paradoxical though the words may be) — does not bring about the event. For instance, the case in which a magnetizer suggested a crisis to supervene after 6,666 minutes. The subject, on waking up, had no remembrance of the suggestion, but the crisis occurred as suggested.

The following case is taken from Dr. Teste's Manuel pratique de magnetisme animal, p. 140. Mme. M., being pregnant, announced on May 8th that she would have a fright on the 12th, and a fall that would have serious though not fatal results. On the 12th, in magnetic sleep, she repeated the prediction, which was completely forgotten on waking, and she was astonished when her husband, fearing the consequences, forbade her going out. She went to her room and gave a cry of fright. A rat ran across the room and the fright caused her to fall, bringing on a miscarriage.

The fact is thoroughly authenticated, but no deduction can be made, for it may be supposed that if the rat had not been there, some other cause would have produced the result.

Denise Blanche, aged eighteen, in blooming health, and belonging to a very honourable family at Aramon (Gard) pressed her parents to have her portrait taken, saying that she had not long to live. There was no reason for the apprehension. One day while she was in the house, there was an alarm of fire. Alongside of the house, separated by a small yard, there was a basket factory which had caught fire, though the damage done was unimportant. Denise was much frightened, felt a vague illness, and died in two months, the actual nature of the disease being indeterminate (communicated by Mr. F. of Aramon).

I cite this case of auto-premonition (which is not evidential), to show that such cases might well be called pseudo-premonitions.

Mme. Clary, very ill (of tuberculosis, doubtless), on being put to sleep by Dr. Teste on the 15th of May, said that she would have high fever on the 2d and 3d of June. Asked, "And on the 4th?" she replied, "I see no more." She died on the 4th of June. There is no need to insist further; such facts prove nothing.

The artist Giovanni Segantini was painting an allegorical picture representing death — a cottage on a snow-covered plain, and a coffin in front of the cottage. One day he dreamed that he saw himself in the coffin and told this dream to his wife. Some days later he had acute peritonitis and died thirteen days after the vision. The circumstances at the funeral at the cottage of Maloja reproduced precisely those of the vision. This also is a pseudo-premonition, for he may have vaguely felt some morbid symptoms that no doctor could foresee.

Similarly the gruesome dream of Earl Hartington, who, while in good health, dreamed of a skeleton looking at him which raised the coverlet and slipped between him and his wife. He died fifteen days after.

The cases next following are taken from Bozzano's book, unless otherwise signified; the roman numbers being Bozzano's.

The reservations applicable to all auto-premonitions should be maintained for that of Mrs. X., carefully analyzed by R. Hodgson. She saw in a dream on March 5th her father, who had been dead eleven years: he showed her a calendar displaying the date, March 22d. Mrs. X. was near her confinement, and thought that the dream meant that she would be delivered on that date. The confinement took place on the 12th, and her family jested on her simplicity in believing prophetic dreams. The confinement was normal, but she died of meningitis on the 22d of March.

Auto-premonitions of organic phenomena are pseudo-premonitions, and may be referred to autoscopic cognitions, nonmetapsychic, produced by the subconsciousness.

Mrs. S., married two years and a half, was distressed at having no child. The planchette gave her, "In six months your hopes will be realized. Happiness to all three. " At the end of six months she found herself enceinte. It must be added that Mrs. S. had had several interesting premonitory dreams.

Without minimizing the interest of this story, there may have been subconscious organic perceptions reaching the subliminal consciousness. This explanation is not very satisfying, but neither is the hypothesis of chance, and the spiritist explanation is still less so.

Bozzano's sixth case may perhaps be explained by subconscious organic sensations. Mrs. Norris was in good health. One night she had a terrifying dream, which she told to her daughter and to Dr. Lyon, her son-in-law. She dreamed that a friend long dead, Mrs. Carleton, said to her, "Your end is near; you will die tomorrow morning at the same hour that you have seen me tonight." Mrs. Norris ordered a bath to be prepared so that her corpse need not be washed, and died at the hour indicated.

Flammarion, in his book Death and Its Mystery, reports several significant cases of auto-premonitions that I cannot reproduce here.

M. Feron, a lawyer of Cherbourg, dreamed that he would not see the end of January. He told this and repeated it. He was quite well to all appearance, but died suddenly on January 18th.

Edward Reed, director of the Natural History Museum at Conception (Chile), dreamed that he saw a grave and cross, with the inscription, "Reed, Nov. 7, 1910," and he told the dream jestingly to several persons. He died on the date mentioned.

Preferring rationalist explanations, 1 refer all these cases to subconscious sensations which give vague warnings to the nervous centres of a defective state in one or other of the vital organs.

The following case of auto-premonition of sickness and death is remarkable for the precision of its details. The story is so dramatic that it would be open to some suspicion had the details not been minutely checked by Dr. Geley (A. S. P., 1916, xxvi, 125-129).

The case is that of M. Dencausse, the father of Mme. Freya. whose lucidity has already been alluded to. In May, 1916, M. Dencausse, then aged seventy-six, and in fairly good health, announced that he would die before winter. He was getting thinner and his nutrition was defective. Towards October 24th he declared that he would die on All Saints' Day. On October 28th, Dr. Geley, who was called, found no organic lesion, no fever, and very slight bronchitis. M. Dencausse then declared that he would die on the stroke of midnight on All Saints' Day without suffering.

On Monday the 30th he was going on well, but on Tuesday pneumonia set in with some fever. On November 1st he was weaker, but could speak and give his last instructions. About 11.30 p.m. he asked his wife, "What is the time?" Mrs. D., to mislead him, said, "Two o'clock in the morning." The sick man replied, "No, it is not yet midnight. I shall die at midnight." Close on the hour he turned to the wall. They came to him and the clock struck; without speaking he raised his hand, pointed to the clock, and expired.

Dr. Geley has noted that Mme. Freya told him her father's predictions from day to day.

A very distinct auto-premonition of death has been related by Dr. W. de Sermyn.1

Jean Vitalis, aged thirty-nine, a strong and vigorous man, was seized by acute rheumatic arthritis. On the sixteenth day of his illness, Dr. de Sermyn who was attending him found him sitting up in bed, smiling and half-way to recovery. Nevertheless, Vitalis said to him, "I have had a vision; my father, who died some years ago, has been to visit me saying that I ought to receive extreme unction; for no doubt he wants me and will come to take me at nine this evening." All day he was well, pain had disappeared, his temperature was normal, and he ate with appetite. He received the unction for the dying, to the great astonishment of the priest. Dr. de Sermyn saw him at 8 p.m., he was in good spirits, laughing and talking with those about him. At one minute to nine he got up from the sofa where he was sitting; said, "The hour is come," jumped on to his bed, arranged the pillows, bent his head, saying, "Good-bye, good-bye," stretched himself out and ceased to move, dying without a gasp or a sigh.

These organic subconsciousnesses sometimes assume the form of an exterior hallucination. Dr. Minot Savage tells the story (Flammarion, loc. cit., 99) of a student in New York who saw a spirit appear and walk beside him in the street. He thought he would die soon, and told his mother who tried to reassure him. Three days later he had appendicitis, was operated on, and died.

It is, however, impossible to suppose organic subconsciousness when the premonition takes place seventy years before the event. Mr. Banister, then a schoolboy, dreamed about the year 1813 that he saw on a gravestone his own name with date of his

^Contribution a V etude de certaines facultes cerebrates meconnues, Lausanne, Payot, 191 1, 13-16.

birth and death, the latter being Jun. 9th. Was it, however Jun., which is an unusual abbreviation for June, or was it Jan., for January? On the 9th of June, 1835, his eldest son died. He was then persuaded that the inscription must have read June 9th; but in fact Mr. Banister died on the 9th of January, 1883.

This is a strange fact among many strange facts, and it seems even fantastic, but it is well authenticated. I cannot, however, advance any explanation that would not be absurd.

x\gain, I shall now quote two more facts still more strange. They would be curious and remarkable if each stood alone. But they do not stand alone, and the resemblance between them, or rather their identity in essentials, makes chance or fantastical imagination alike untenable as an explanation.

The first of these (Bozzano's No. vii), refers to a child of two years and seven months (1883), named Ray. A baby brother of Ray's had lately died. Little Ray had repeated visions; he constantly saw his brother sitting on a chair and calling him. "Mother," he said, "the little brother calls Ray; he wants him with him." Another day he said, "Don't cry, the little brother smiles at Ray. Ray is going to him." The child's intelligence was much above that usual to his age. He died two months and seven days after the death of his brother. No one can doubt that he had some kind of premonitory vision; and this is the more extraordinary as that at his age he could not have understood the meaning of death. The second case (unpublished) seems almost modelled on Ray's case.

Louise F., aged forty-eight, died after an abdominal operation in January, 1896. During her illness she frequently asked that, when cured, she might take her little niece Lily, aged three years and three months, of whom she was very fond, to live with her in the country. About a month after the death of her aunt, little Lily who was intelligent and precocious and in quite good health, often stopped in her play to look fixedly out of the window. Her mother asked her what she was looking at, and she answered, "It is Aunt Louise, who holds out her arms to me and calls me." Her mother, much frightened, tried to distract her attention, but the child drew her chair to the window and continued to look for several minutes. Her brother, M. F., who gave me these details, said, "I was then eleven years old and my little sister said, 'What! Don't you see Tata?' as she called her aunt. Of course I could see nothing." For some months nothing further was seen by the child, the visions ceased. Towards May 20th, little Lily fell ill, and when in bed she looked up to the ceiling saying that she saw her aunt calling her, surrounded by little angels. "Mother, how pretty!" she said. From day to day her illness increased, but she always repeated, "My aunt has come to fetch me; she is holding out her arms to me," and as her mother wept, she said, "Don't cry, mother, it is very beautiful, there are angels round me."

She died on the 9th of June of tubercular meningitis four and a half months after the death of Louise F.

Such is the story told me by M. F., her brother, confirmed by his sister G. F., and her mother. The family lived very quietly in a country town. None of them know any English or anything of psychic science.

I give the story as it came to me, without attempting any explanation. A somewhat similar fact is given by Stainton Moses (Luce e Ombra, xx, 1920, 19). Miss H., the daughter of an English clergyman, was tending a dying child. His little brother, aged three to four years, was in a little bed in the same room. As the former was dying, the child woke up, and, pointing to the ceiling with every expression of joy, said, "Mother, look at the beautiful ladies round my brother! How lovely they are, they want to take him." The child died at that moment.

Another instance is reported by M. Pelusi, librarian at the Victor Emmanuel Library at Rome (Luce e Ombra, 1920, 20). A little girl of three, Hippolyte Notari, partly paralyzed, was in the same room with her little brother of four months, who was dying. The father, the mother, and the grandmother of the two children were present. About fifteen minutes before the death of the infant, little Hippolyte stretched out her arms, saying, "Look, mother, Aunt Olga." This Aunt Olga was a younger sister of Mme. Notari who had killed herself a year previously owing to a disappointment in love. The parents asked, "Where do you see Aunt Olga?" The child said, "There, there," and tried insistently to get out of bed to go to her aunt. They let her get up, she ran to an empty chair, and was much discountenanced, because the vision had moved to another part of the room. The child turned round and said, pointing to a corner, "Aunt Olga is there." Then she became quiet and the baby died.

Facts of this kind are very important. They are much more explicable on the spiritist theory than by the hypothesis of mere cryptesthesia. Among all the facts adduced to prove survival, these even seem to me to be the most disquieting. I have therefore thought it a duty to be scrupulous in mentioning them. But in despite of their spiritoid nature, they are insufficient to make me believe that the consciousness of the deceased persons is present as a phantom at the death of their relatives. (!!!)

Bozzano's cases, ix and x, do not seem to me worth record; for an announcement of death to occur five years later is too vague to have much value.



(b) Auto-Premonitions of Accidental Death

No effect of organic subconsciousness can be invoked in such cases: they are clearly metapsychic premonitions.

There are a dozen or so of these that are too ancient for criticism or for any inferences from them (A. S. P., 1898, vii, 316).

Mr. D. (Bozzano's case xiii), dreamed that he was in an inn where he met several friends, all of them being deceased persons. They made him promise to return in six weeks. When he woke up, Mr. D. told the dream, joking over it. Exactly six weeks later he was riding and met his death in an accident.

If this case stood alone it would be reasonable to refer it to chance, and this may always be done; but there are too many such cases for the inference that chance plays so great a part in our lives. Chance is the god of the ignorant.

Armand Carrel saw in a dream his mother clad in mourning, and weeping. "I weep for you, my son," she said. On the day following this dream Armand Carrel wrote for the National the famous article that resulted in the duel with Emile de Girardin in which he was killed. No premonitory value can be attached to this dream, for Armand Carrel must have known that the article he had under contemplation would involve peril.

The following case, though not quite an auto-premonition, is akin thereto, for it is of a doctor who foresaw the death of his child. Possibly certain signs reaching his subconsciousness led to the prognosis (?).

Dr. de Sermyn saw, in a dream, his child of four fall into a stove and burn to death. He woke up, went to his child's room, and found him sleeping peacefully. "Thank God/' he said, "it is only a dream." In the morning the child was still in good health, but at noon he was very feverish. Haunted by the dream, Dr. de S. knew that his child was lost to him. A colleague called in by him thought the illness not serious; but it grew worse from hour to hour, developed into broncho-pneumonia, and the child died on the fourth day.

In this, as in many cases of monition, I am inclined to think, with Myers and Bozzano, that the phenomena are of a metapsychic order; but rigorous proof is impossible.

Dr. von Gudden (case xv), before leaving for the castle of Hochenswangen, dreamed that he was drowning and struggling with someone in the water. He told the dream to his wife. Some days later his body was found in the lake, drowned along with King Louis of Bavaria. The premonition here is obvious.

It is still more so in case xviii, one of the most striking.

In 1895 M. Lukawski, of Petersburg, who was an official at the Ministry of the Marine (which does not at all imply his going to sea), dreamed that he was on board a ship, that there was a collision, that he fell into the water with another passenger and was drowned. From that moment he was convinced that he would die by shipwreck, and put his affairs in order. However, after some months, when the remembrance of the dream had faded, he received the order to leave for a port on the Black Sea. This recalled his dream, and before leaving he said to his wife, "You will see me no more; when you hear of my death put on mourning, but not that black veil which I dislike so much." Two weeks later the Vladimir, on which he was travelling, collided with another vessel and M. Lukawski was drowned. Another passenger, M. Henicke, who escaped, says that he and M. Lukawski were for a short time holding on to the same life-buoy.

Mme. Dudlay, of the Comedie Franchise, tells of a spiritualist seance in which Irene Muza was the medium. Irene, in 1908, began to weep when asked what would happen in 1909, saying, "It is horrible," but nothing more. She perished in the fire of February 23, 1909. This premonition is too vague to carry weight.

The little daughter of M. Domenico Fleres, barrister in the Appeal Court of Palermo, leaving for Messina when she was eight years old, said, "Good-bye, grandma, we shall never see each other again." Some hours before the Messina earthquake, when her mother was putting on her night-socks, the child said, "Why do you put on these death-socks?" and repeated, "My deathsocks." She perished in the earthquake (case xviii).

Case xix, a boy of twelve, saw himself in a coffin, and told the story in a semi-hypnotic state. Eight days later he was drowned in the lake. The case is not very evidential, for the child was sickly and the case is possibly one of suicide.

Auto-premonitions are always a little doubtful, for a nonmetapsychic explanation can often be found; nevertheless, in some, as in the Banister and Von Gudden cases, the cryptesthetic premonition is obvious.



3. Premonitions, Properly So-called

True premonitions are those in which neither subconscious organic sensation, nor will, nor auto-suggestion can be supposed to intervene.

Instead of following Bozzano's classification, I shall deal with them in three groups according as they occur, (1) under hypnotism, (2) under spiritist conditions, where an external personality, a spirit, or guide ostensibly dictates the premonition, and (3) as casual or accidental premonitions to normal persons, l"V either awake or dreaming. Premonitions that fall within the two

former classes are less frequent and less interesting than those of the third class; it is also difficult to draw a line of demarcation between them, for mediums are often in a semi-hypnotic state, and, moreover, even when not in seance, their predictions seem sometimes to be guided by a spirit. Also, normal persons fall into a kind of auto-hypnosis at the moment of premonition.



(a) Premonitions Under Hypnotism

The Seeress of Prevorst, whose psychological state was that of a medium rather than of a somnambulist, gave many prophecies reported by J. Kerner (Bozzano's case xxv).

Bozzano cites five of these prophecies, the most striking of which is the following:

She dreamed that Mme. L., whom she had never seen, came to her weeping with a dead child in her arms. Six weeks later Mme. L. was confined and lost her child.

In another instance (case cv) she saw in a dream a person known to her who had died; he was anxious to speak of his daughter, who was menaced by misfortune. Some weeks later a tile fell on the head of this daughter and nearly killed her.

Dr. Rostan (case xxviii) relates that a somnambulist in her sleep predicted that a friend of hers, then not very ill, would die of hemorrhage in six days exactly. The prediction was fulfilled both as to fact and time.

Dr. Liebeault (xxix) cites a prediction by a young girl named Julia, who in November, 1883, said that a certain lady, then in no way ill, would die before the 1st of January. She died on December 31st.

Liebeault also gives the following often-quoted fact: In 1879 a somnambulist predicted to M. L. that he would lose his father after a year; that he would be a soldier, would marry, and have two children; and that he would die at twenty-six. All this was exactly fulfilled, only the death prophecy was left. Then as the approach of the twenty-sixth birthday threw L. into a state of melancholy hypochondria, Liebeault prescribed a counter-sitting and prediction arranged beforehand, which completely reassured L. "But," says Liebeault, "no man can escape his destiny" and L. died at twenty-six.

Mme. G. de Montebello told me the following fact: In April or May, 1884, she chanced to meet at the house of a friend of hers a certain somnambulist who predicted that someone dear to her would perish in a terrible accident. Mme. de M., much moved, asked, "Is it my grandmother?" "No," said the somnambulist, "it is not your grandmother, but someone very near you, who will die by the falling of a wall."

Some weeks later my dear mother, who was an aunt of Mme. de Montebello, perished by the bursting of a dam-wall and was buried under its ruins.

Dr. Osty received, in 1912, the following details from a somnambulist whom he then saw for the first time:

"You live in a little town in the middle of France; your room looks out on a small square. From thence you go to your office; men come and go; it is a constant coming and going. What a mass of papers! You look, you write, and you give the papers back."

In 1914 Dr. Osty was appointed chief medical officer at Vierzon; he lodged in a house answering to the description given; he had administrative work during the war which involved the signing of many papers. In 1912 he could not possibly have foreseen these duties.

A clairvoyant somnambulist (lxxvi) predicted in 1887 that "Marie Thierault will live a life of pleasure, which will end in a terrible way, before three moons after January 14, 1907. It is not given to me to see the dreadful date, but January 14th rises before me and I see the full moon shining."

On the 18th of January, 1907, Marie Thierault, who led more or less the life of a light woman, was murdered by her friend, Lucette Joquelet. Lucette was charged at the Assizes, and the defending counsel produced the prediction given in 1887.

This is an amazing and quite unforeseeable premonition. Of course, it may be maintained that the somnambulistic prediction of 1887 was fabricated for the defence. The evidence as given in the trial is perfectly authenticated.

Lady A. (case lxxvii) went to consult Mme. de'E., a somnambulist and seeress, about a theft. Mme. de'E., without the lady having indicated anything about the purpose of the consultation, said that the affair related to a theft of banknotes, and that within two years the thief would suffer capital punishment. She could give only the vaguest indications of his person. Not till very long after did it appear that the thief was the too famous Marchandon, who was executed two years later for murder.

The entire account of this surprising prediction should be read, for it contains many extremely xurious details.

Lady Burton (case xciv) tells that when she was a young girl, Isabel Arundell, she met a gipsy woman who gave her a written prediction: "You will cross the sea, and reach the town where your destiny is awaiting you. You will marry a man of the name of our tribe (Burton) and you will be proud of the name." An astonishing prediction, especially as to the name.

Metapsychic stories told by novelists must be accepted with reserve, but it is difficult not to attach some credit to the story given by Arsene Houssaye in his Confessions (p. 425). An Italian seeress told his sister Cecile, at Toulon, that the sea would be adverse to her. In 1870 Cecile for this reason would not cross into England. On October 10, 1870, she went for a walk to the Point de Penmarch in Brittany to see the waves breaking on the rocks. A huge wave washed across the promontory and swept Cecile and three other girls into the sea.

Dr. A. Wallace (case cviii) received Mrs. Paulet at his house. This clairvoyant said to his son, young Mr. Wallace, then twenty years of age, who was a student of chemistry, "There will be an explosion in your laboratory in February or March and someone will be injured." Another clairvoyant repeated the same prediction on the 20th of January. On the 9th of March a terrible explosion took place and severely injured one of the students.

Mr. R. dreamed, on May 25th, that a somnambulist told him,

"Your father will die on the 2d of June (1900)." Next day he told the dream to his parents who laughed over it, for Mr. R. (senior) was in good health. On June 1st this gentleman went to a funeral, and jestingly said, "If I am to die tomorrow I have not much time to lose." He went to bed that night in his usual health at 11 p.m., was taken in the night with sudden illness and died on June 2d, twenty minutes after midnight.

Dr. Charles Roux reports three astonishing premonitions made by three different somnambulists to the same person.

The wife of Dr. A. met by chance a somnambulist, who said to her, "In a short time there will be a catastrophe in your family that will cause you much grief." Somewhat affected by this she went to another clairvoyant, who said, "Your children (your daughter) will be ill very shortly; abdominal pains; she will have an operation, but will recover." The third, to whom Mme. A. gave her glove, said, "This glove has been touched by a person who is very ill; she has acute pain in the abdomen, diffused pain. There is pus from peritonitis, but she will recover."

Ten days after the latter prediction Mile. A., aged fifteen, till then seemingly in perfect health, was attacked by acute peritonitis, was operated on and pus was withdrawn, but, contrary to the predictions, the poor child died.

This triple premonition from three different persons is most noteworthy; not only because of the high scientific authority of Dr. Roux, who is very well informed on scientific matters and in no way credulous, and verified the facts with the greatest care, but because of the agreement of the three sensitives. This leads to the inference not that the clairvoyants were exceptionally sensitive, but that there must have been some powerful exterior cause (what?) that enabled them to foresee Mile. A.'s illness.

The sensitive Alexis (case cxi) gave a wonderful instance of lucidity and premonition. In 1847 he went, in hypnotic sleep, to Rome and passing before the Pantheon, said, "This monument is destined to a more solemn and wholly Italian purpose." Bozzano rightly insists on the remarkable character of this prediction, made in 1847 and printed in 1867, at a time when no one could foresee that the Pantheon would be reserved as a mausoleum for the kings of United Italy.

Alice gave me two good premonitions in hypnotic sleep. On the 10th of December, 1886, she spoke of someone who would shortly be seriously ill. "Is it one of my children, one of my relations, or one of my friends?" The answer was, "No, no, but do not take this lightly, it will cause you much trouble. It is not one of your friends, nor a relation, nor a woman, nor a child," and she added these words, which I wrote down on returning home, "He will have shivers, high fever, trembling, suffocation, shudderings of fever, like colic. The fever will come on without much pain, there will be prostration and great lassitude; the head will be affected,, (P. S. P. R., 1888, 181). Eight days later, about December 18th, my colleague, Eugene Yung, whom Alice did not know at all, editor of the Revue Bleue, connected with the Revue Scientifique, and seemingly in quite good health, was taken with shivering, fever, and renal colic due to abscess. The illness made rapid progress, the urinary system became affected, coma set in (Alice had said that the head would be affected) and he died.

The death of my eminent colleague involved me in much trouble and my position as editor of the Revue Scientifique was near being compromised.

I ought, moreover, to say that I had completely forgotten Alice's prediction, although I had noted it down, till she in hypnotic sleep recalled it to my mind. She had seen in the newspapers an account of the death and the consequent troubles.

The other prediction is yet more extraordinary. As it is unpublished, I give all needful details.

It was my custom to leave her for some hours in hypnotic sleep; she would then remain quite motionless and on my return two or three hours later the clairvoyance seemed to me more acute. On my return that day she said that something serious would happen. "You will be very angry, very angry indeed. There are people there, and there,', pointing with her hand as though there were three or four persons near me. This did not affect me, for I am seldom moved to anger; but she insisted and seemed so troubled that I had to wake her. It was 2 p.m. on a Wednesday.

At six o'clock the same day I went to the office of the Revue Scientifique to correct proofs along with the secretary, Dr. Hericourt. Henri Ferrari, editor of the Revue Bleue, was there also correcting his proofs. All three of us were absorbed in our work, when one of the contributors entered (I may note passim that he afterwards became a colleague of mine). He looked at us with some surprise, and I said, "Excuse us a few minutes, we shall soon have finished." He walked up and down while we went on with our proof-reading. Then some extraordinary whim took him, he sat himself down before Ferrari and said, "You are just like

a wren, I don't care a for you." I saw Ferrari turn

pale, dumb with astonishment, and striking the table I said to X., "You are an out-and-out cad; get out V9 and I went to the door and opened it.

That evening X. sent me a challenge to a duel. It is the only one I ever received. Of course, I left it unanswered, and some years later we resumed our good relations.

The important fact is not this absurd and trivial incident, but the prediction of a most unlikely event which provoked in me violent and justified anger; this being one of the very few times that I have been carried away by anger in the course of a long life. Alice had predicted this four hours earlier, pointing to three or four persons round me.



(b) Spiritist Premonitions

The premonitions to which I give this name are not always markedly different from others. They are characterized by this — that the subject is making an attempt to know the future by the planchette, by automatic writing, by psychometry, by crystal vision, or by some other means, instead of remaining passive during his normal life, whether sleeping or waking, and being dominated by the metapsychic fact. He is not suffering an accident, but is making an experiment.

Mrs. Piper (or Phinuit) has often made prophecies of deaths or minor events which have been verified (Bozzano's cases xxi to xxiv).

On May 10, 1892, Phinuit said that the brother of Mr. T., whom Mrs. Piper did not know, had kidney trouble, that his heart would stop, and that he would enter the spirit-world. Soon after it was established that he had kidney disease and he died of syncope in his sleep, September 3, 1892.

Dr. Louis Cohen, of St. Louis (U. S. A.), visited Mrs. Leonard, who described his father quite accurately and told him that his father had died and that he himself would soon be summoned back to America by cable. This was on April 20th; on the 23d the prediction was exactly fulfilled.

Mr. S. Shaw (case xli) saw a professional medium in London, who said, "Your mother is dead," which was untrue. She corrected herself and said, "She will die in three months. She is well

i at present but work tires her and she needs to lie down in the daytime. Her death will be sudden/' Two months later Mr. S. received a letter from his mother, saying that she was in good health but needed a sleep during the day. She died suddenly two and a half months after the premonition.

Mr. William Stead's secretary, E. M., was in weak health and irritable. Stead thought of closing the connection; but "Julia," writing by the hand of Stead, gave the message: "Be patient, she will come to join us before the end of the year." This prediction was repeated several times. In July E. M. was very ill. Julia wrote, "She will get well, but will not outlive the year." In December E. M. had influenza, and Julia wrote, "She will not come over naturally, and it will be before the end of the year/' On January 10th E. M. was extremely ill and Julia wrote, "I may be mistaken by a few days, but all that I have told you is true. Bid her good-bye." On January 12th E. M. threw herself out of the window in her delirium and died.

A friend of Mr. Stead had come from India to England, and intending to make a long stay had arranged for a series of lectures on free trade and other subjects, at Manchester and elsewhere. Julia, through the intermediary of Stead, told him that he would return to India before the end of the year. This was repeated on the 14th and the 16th of August, and on the 11th of September Mr. Tracy refused to believe it, but a month later he was recalled to India by the serious illness of a relation and left before the end of the year (Stead, in Borderland, 1894, ii, 43).

A non-professional medium, the granddaughter of the celebrated physiologist, Tiedemann, of Heidelberg, predicted to a young man, Mr. S., that he would become a senator for Missouri in the United States. This seemed so improbable that he laughed at the prediction, but two years later he moved from Wisconsin, where he lived, to Missouri and was nominated senator some time after.

A distinguished physician of Palermo, M. Carmelo Samona, well acquainted with metapsychic science, lost his little daughter Alexandrina, aged five, in 1910. Mme. Samona was wild with grief. Three days after she saw the child in a dream, who said to her, "I have not left you; I have become tiny like that/' designating some very small object. A fresh pregnancy was the more unlikely in that Mme. Samona had undergone a serious ovarian operation a year previously. On April 10th, however, she became aware that she was pregnant. On May 4th it was predicted by

Alexandrina, communicating by means of the table, that Mme. Samona would be delivered of twin girls, one of whom would entirely resemble Alexandrina. This came to pass. One of the twins had a mark on the left eye and another mark on the right ear with asymmetry of the face, precisely like the deceased child (Duchatel and Warcollier, Les miracles de la volonte, p. 239).

This premonition would seem to imply the phenomenon that spiritists call "reincarnation." But the data on this perplexing problem — the most obscure in the whole of all metapsychics — are so fragmentary that they amount to nothing from the point of view of strict science.

Dr. E. Waller relates a fact that seems to show cryptesthesia. He saw in the crystal a lady, Mrs. D., well known to him, and with her another person whom he did not know. A few days later he met Mrs. D. with this other person in the place that he had seen in the crystal under tragical circumstances which ended in a real drama (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 133-141).

In February, 1890, impelled by a power that she could not resist, Mrs. R. V. went to consult Zuleika, a professional seeress. Zuleika told the lady that her husband would leave for South Africa, would die there in November of the same year, and that he ought to set his affairs and his insurances in order so as to avoid heavy expenses and much trouble for all concerned. Mr. V/s departure, which was uncertain, duly took place, and in November, 1890, he died in Africa, in despite of his robust health. The precautions indicated had not been taken, whence much expense and trouble resulted; "disastrous consequences" Mrs. V. calls them (Bozzano, liv).

Zuleika's premonition was noted down by Mrs. V. in her diary in February, 1890.

