Mme. Juliette Adam, the distinguished writer, was in her room nursing her child at 10 p.m. Roused by the child's crying, she saw her grandmother at the foot of her bed. She said, "Dear granny, I am so glad to see you"; but the shade did not reply, and raised a hand to her eyes. "I saw," says Mme. Adam, "two empty sockets. I jumped out of bed and ran towards her, but as I was about to clasp her in my arms, the phantom vanished." The grandmother had died about two hours previously (Flammarion, p. 187).

Mrs. Allom, being then a young girl of seventeen, was at school in Alsace. One day, when reading in the sitting-room, she saw her mother dressed in her night-gown, lying down as if in bed; she was smiling and raised one arm, pointing upwards. The apparition moved slowly across the room, and rising higher, disappeared. Two days later the mistress called the girl to the study, who said, "You can tell me nothing, I know that my mother has died." Mrs. Carrick, her mother, had in fact died on that day and at the same hour.

Alexis ArbonsofT, of Pskoff (Russia) dreamed in bed one morning that his mother came, embraced him, and said, "Adieu, I am dying." He woke, shuddering, and looked at the time, 7.30. Ten minutes later the whole house was aroused. His mother had risen at 7 o'clock, had gone to kiss her little granddaughter, and then as she said her prayers before the icons, she had died suddenly at 7.30 (Flammarion, 435).

Mme. Van B., at Ypres, waked up with a start at 4.45 a.m., feeling that her father was ill or dying. She awoke her husband, who tried to calm her, thinking it a nightmare. Her father died at the same hour (A. S. P., 1899, ix, 71).

The Rev. Mr. Ball of Cambridge dreamt that he was with his friend Dombrain in beautiful country. A bright light appeared before him; he woke up, and saw his friend Dombrain smiling in the beam of light. Mr. Ball rose at once, calling "Robert, Robert," and the vision disappeared. It so happened that a young house servant was named Robert, thought he was called, and came. Mr. Ball then realized as clearly as if he had been at the bedside that his friend Dombrain had died. He noted the time — three minutes past five. At that very moment Robert Dombrain died.

The following fact, narrated by M. Pyrrhus Bessi {Revue des Etudes Psychiques, 1901, 21-23; 97-168), is a case of monition of death by accidental crystal vision. M. Bessi, at Panicola (in Italy, near Perusia), working alone in his room one night, broke off to rest for a moment. His lamp nearly went out, he tried to re-light it, and it went out completely. Nevertheless, the room was filled with a dim light; and in an old mirror he saw, as if through an opening in the wall, another room differently furnished, and in it an old lady whom he recognized, sitting at a table. She took some paper from a drawer and began to write slowly, put the paper in an envelope, rested her head on the back of the chair, and went to sleep. Next day M. Bessi learned that this lady had died in the night; her will, written in her own hand, was found in the drawer of the table.

The next account has just been given to me by an eminent member of the Paris bar, whom I will call A., as I have no right to give his name. The fact is of ancient date, since it concerns his grandmother.

Mme. A., who had been early widowed, had one evening been too eagerly courted by a near relation, B., and had been somewhat offended. Some months later, in the winter, being in the country nursing a sick child, she found the room very cold on a particular night, and not wishing to call up the servant, went herself to the wood-store to get some logs. On opening the door of the woodstore she saw B. before her. He knelt down, took her hands, and said, "Forgive me." She was speechless with astonishment, the vision being as clear as fact; but in a few moments it vanished. Next morning a telegram arrived announcing B.'s death.

The Rev. Mr. Barker, being in bed at 11 p.m., before going to sleep perceived the smiling face of an aunt then in Madeira. He shuddered and told the vision to his wife and to several other persons. The aunt had died at the same hour, allowing for difference of longitude.1

Mr. Baeschly, of Saverne, aged twenty, was alone with his father in the house, when towards midnight they were awakened by great noises. They got up, but could find no cause. They returned to bed and the noises recommenced; they then found the front door opened. This occurred a third time, and they then fastened the door with rope. Some time later they received a letter from America announcing the death of M. Baeschly's brother. It appears that shortly before death, on awaking from a

^his case is referred to by Grasset as proving nothing; but this criticism is baseless: he speaks of a commonplace dream "such as had probably occurred to Mr. Barker some hundreds or thousands of times." But this is assuredly not the case; the hallucination is so clear that he tells it to his wife and his friends as a singular thing, perhaps unique in his life. Does the coincidence of time count for nothing?

long coma, he had said, "I have made a long journey, I have been to my brother at Brunatte" (Chevreul, 334).

Miss Beale, then aged fourteen, sees a man in a loose dressinggown in her room in the middle of the night. He seemed to be feeling his way, and vanished. Miss B., much frightened, called to another girl sleeping in the same room. The latter said, "It is doubtless my brother C." The next morning at breakfast C. declared that he had not entered the room, but that he also had seen a form enter his room whom he knew as that of a friend (in poor health, but not thought to be in danger) who had agreed with him that the first to die should appear to the other. He had died that same night (A. S. P., 1891, i, 13).

M. Beaugrand, a journalist of Havre, known to me personally, told me and produced documents confirming his story, that his mother at Havre on the 2d of November, 1856, before going to bed, heard what seemed a terrible storm and saw the chimney shaken as if by a high wind. There was no storm nor wind, but the same day at 11 p.m. her husband perished in a cyclone some miles from New York on his passage to Havre. This old story would not by itself be very evidential, for memories become twisted out of shape as time goes on; but it is probable that these old cases, so closely parallel with recent ones, are correct in the main. Many good instances, too long to be reproduced here, will be found in C. Flammarion's paper, "Les apparitions au moment de la mort" (Revue Spirite, February, 1921, 33).

Elsa Barker, the author of sundry novels (The Son of Mary Bethel, etc.), being in Paris at the time, was suddenly moved to write automatically, "I am here, I can see you; I found myself before the inevitable," etc. The signature was X., a person whom she hardly knew, an American author and magistrate aged about seventy. She asked her friends for details of X., whom she had only seen at distant intervals, and learned that he had died a few days before the message had come to her. She thinks that she was the first person in Europe to learn the news. This writing was followed by numerous others, published as Letters from a Living Dead Man (Rider, 1917). The book has but slight scientific interest, but should be read carefully as showing the powers of the subconscious in a distinguished writer.

On May 4th Lord Beresford, steaming between Gibraltar and Marseilles, saw a coffin containing his father in his cabin as distinctly as if it were real. He spoke of it to his shipmates and on arriving at Marseilles learned that his father had died April 29th and was buried on May 4th (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 727).

M. Berget, professor of physics at the Sorbonne, narrates that his mother when a young girl suddenly heard the voice of a friend living far from Paris, and fainted with fear. On recovering she said, "How horrible! Amelia is dead; I heard her sing as only the dead can." Amelia died at that time, 3 p.m., at Strasburg, in the convent of which she was a member (Flammarion, 78).

The Rev. P. Beck, of Southbank, Yorkshire, felt an inexplicable sadness one evening after dinner. At ten minutes to eight exactly he saw a form descending the stairs. His wife who was with him saw nothing. The apparition agreed in height and dress with Mr. Beck's mother, but Mr. Beck did not recognize it. Mrs. Beck died some hundred miles away at the same hour {A. S. P., 1891, i, 367).

M. Belbeder, of the Sixth Colonial Regiment, went on leave to some friends at Riberac in the Dordogne. When going to sleep he saw a white transparent shade move from the chimney-piece, come towards him, and bend over the bed. He says, "I fully understood that she said, 'Always remain my son's friend.' The form slowly rose and I recognized the mother of one of my best friends whom I had left in good health. I got up, lest I should be under an illusion; the night was very dark and there was no moon." The person whose shape was recognized had died some two hours before (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armces).

M. Binet, aged fifteen, was unable to sleep. About 12.30 he seemed to see a ray of moonlight, and this luminous shadow took the form of a person and moved towards his bed. He cried out, "Leontine!" He spoke of this apparition before knowing that Leontine had died at that very hour (Flammarion, 84).

The following monition is not more remarkable than others; but I give it because I was to some extent a witness of certain details (October, 1919). It takes the usual form of such monitions.

In the night of October 22-23, 1919, Adele Bureau, a widow, forty-one years of age, in the service of my daughter-in-law, Mme. Albert Richet, at Carqueiranne (Var), heard in sleep, at about 3 a.m., a knock at her door. She tried to say "Come in," but seemed paralyzed, "as if her night-dress were glued to the bed," so that she could say or do nothing. Then she saw the form of a woman dressed in white standing on the threshold as if the door were open. She could not distinguish the face, for the shape turned its back and vanished as she looked. It disappeared as if through the door, which, however, had neither been opened nor shut. Adele went to sleep again, though with difficulty. She did not recognize the shape, but thought of a niece whom she loved, who was seriously ill. On the next day, and after relating "the nightmare/' as she called it, to my daughter-in-law, she received a telegram announcing the death of her niece.

Adele told me that she did not recognize her niece, not having seen the face, but had thought of her. The costume was like a white bridal dress, and she thought that her niece (only a year married) must have been so buried. The emotion caused was so strong that Adele was quite ill with tears and headache.1

The next instance is not, strictly speaking, a monition of death, but presents a remarkable monitory character (Jour. S. P. R., July, 1919). Father Brompton (a pseudonym) was due to go next day to administer the last sacraments to a sick woman. He gave his telephone number to the nurse in case the patient were worse. At dawn he was awaked and saw a human form, which said, "There is a telephone message for you." It was 4.15 a.m. He dressed hurriedly and arrived just in time to administer the sacraments. It was proved that the telephone had not been used and that no one had called him.

Should we consider this a visual and auditory hallucination of Father Brompton, preoccupied with his duty to the dying woman? Given the many authentic monitions that are known, it is legitimate to suppose that this was a true monition involving lucidity, and not a morbid non-veridical hallucination such as occurs to alcoholics and insanes.

Mrs. Bishop, travelling in the Rocky Mountains, made the acquaintance of a Creole known as Mountain Jim. He said to her, "I will see you again when I die.,, Mrs. Bishop states, "In 1874, ten years later, being at Interlaken, at about 6 a.m., I was sitting up in bed, writing, when I saw Mountain Jim before me. His eyes were fixed on me, and when I looked up he said, very low but very clearly, T am come as I promised/ made a sign

1The telegram was "Mme. Bureau, Carqueiranne, October 23d, Chissey en Morvan (Saone et Loire. Jeanne, deceased this morning, funeral Friday eleven. Berthelon.") Adele had never before seen any apparition. Some years ago, after the death of one of her aunts, she had nightmares in which she thought herself pursued and suffocated by this aunt. She had masses said and the dreams ceased. Adele Bureau is intelligent and responsible. The dead girl was not interred in her bridal dress.

with his hand, and said, 'Adieu/ Mrs. Ker, who was with me in the hotel, and I both took a note of the date and hour. The news of the death reached us later, and the time, allowing for difference of longitude, agreed with that of the apparition."

The certificate of death of Mountain Jim shows that he died at Fort Collins (Colorado) on September 7, 1874, at 3 p.m., which corresponds to 10 a.m. at Interlaken. Mrs. Bishop does not say whether the vision was on the 7th or the 8th of September; if the former the vision preceded death by four hours; if the latter, twenty hours elapsed between the two events.

Mme. Stella, then aged seventeen, sees a young and somewhat intimate friend of hers coming into her room. She writes: "The door opens and I see him come in. I get up to push an armchair for him near the fire for it was snowing, and he seemed cold, having no cloak. I began to scold him for coming without one. Instead of answering, he placed his hand on his breast and then on his head. I was still speaking when Dr. G. entered and asked to whom I was speaking. I said, 'Here is this tiresome boy come out without a cloak, and he with such a cold that he can't speak. Lend him your cloak and send him home.' I shall never forget the horror and stupefaction of the doctor; for Bertie had died about twenty minutes before. I had heard the handle turned and the door opened. The figure walked in the room and sat down while I lit the candles. The apparition lasted nearly five minutes" (A. S. P., 1892, ii, 173).

The Rev. Mr. Field, in New Zealand, while asleep, hears himself called, "Harry, Harry," and clearly recognized his mother's voice. She usually called him Henry, not Harry. It was the 28th of November, 1873. At the same time, given the difference of longitude, his mother died in London, saying "Harry, Harry" (A. S. P., 1892, ii, 175).

The following account is by a celebrated painter, A. Besnard. It is at third-hand, and therefore must be accepted with great reserve. On the 13th of July, 1842, Mme. B., ill and dying, woke with a start and cried, "What a misfortune, the Duke of Orleans is dead." When Dr. Vidal came to see the dying woman he said, "Have you heard the news? The Duke of Orleans has been killed at Neuilly in a carriage accident." M. Bremon said, "I knew, she told us."1

better from A. Besnard to Jules Bois, L'Au-Deld et les forces inconnues, Paris, 1903, 127.

Mme. Bloch, at Rome, was dressing at 7 a.m. when she saw her nephew, Rene Kraemer, who said to her, "Yes, I am dead." Much frightened, she went to call her son, who tried to reassure her. Rene Kraemer, aged fourteen, had died of acute peritonitis the same morning; death setting in at 7 a.m. and the end coming at noon (Flammarion, L'Inconnit et les Problemes Psychiques, 70).

Mme. Boniface, a schoolmistress at Etampes, when a child of seven at Niort, dreamt that she was in a dark room where there was a coffin, that she rushed out, and in the next room felt a hand on her shoulder. She recognized her father, whom she had not seen for two years, who said to her, "Do not be afraid, little one, kiss me." Her father had died at Paris that evening (Flammarion, 407).

Lord Brougham tells in his memoirs (Life and Times of Lord Brougham, 1871, 201-203) that being at Gothenburg in Sweden, in 1799, he was taking a bath and saw on the chair where he had put his clothes an intimate friend, G., who had gone to India and to whom he had not written for years, looking at him calmly. It was the 19th of December, on which date G. had died.

Dr. Rowland Bowstear, running after a ball at cricket, suddenly sees his brother-in-law by the hedge, in shooting clothes with his gun on his arm. A friend with him saw nothing, though Dr. B. pointed out the apparition, which disappeared. It was 1.10 p.m. The day and hour coincided with the sudden death of his brotherin-law, who was out shooting and was carrying his gun.

Dr. Bock went with his brother to a music-hall in Munich. They were enjoying the entertainment, when between the acts he heard a loud knock, and saw the figure of his mother stretched corpse-like on the bed with a cross in her hands. Sure that his mother had died, he left the hall, despite the protest of his brother, who did not understand his fear, knowing that their mother seemed well. But Dr. Bock said, "My mother is dead, I could swear it." He made arrangements for a substitute at his duties, ordered his mourning, and next day received a telegram announcing that she had died at the hour of the vision (A. S. P., July, 1913, 195).

Emma Burger, lady's maid to the Countess of Ussel, was sleeping on the night of August 15-16, in the room opening off that of her mistress, the door being open. Suddenly she saw clearly her fiance, Charles B., standing at the half-opened door into the passage. "He was in travelling dress and I saw his features and the details of his clothes quite clearly. He smiled but said nothing. I said, 'Oh, go away/ Madame, who was in the next room, heard me, and said, 'Emma, what is the matter? Are you dreaming?' I then said in a low voice to Charles, 'Oh, do go away.' He disappeared, not suddenly but slowly, as if closing the door and leaving. Next day I asked if anyone had been sent to my room." 1 On the 18th Emma received news that Charles had died of heart seizure on the night of the 15th- 16th of August (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 1886, 696).

M. Basserole, a schoolmaster in Brittany, received a letter summoning him to his sick father. At the station of Redon at 4.40 p.m. he fainted, and when he came to himself, before seeing anyone in the waiting-room, he saw the figure of his father, which disappeared at once. Mr. Basserole died at 6 p.m. (Flammarion, 128).

M. Jacques C, at Grenoble, had gone to bed, when he saw the door of his room open nearly noiselessly, and a girl, Martha, to whom he had been engaged, entered. She was dressed in white, her hair down on her shoulders. M. C. is sure he was not sleeping. She came to the bedside and bent over him. C. took her hand. It was quite cold. He cried out and the phantom vanished, and C. found that he had a glass of water in his hand. Martha had died at Toulouse at the same hour (Flammarion, 164).

Miss Bibby, aged nineteen, woke up with the feeling of someone in her room. She saw the figure of her grandfather, whom she recognized. He called to her, "Miss Nellie, ma'am," as he was accustomed to do in jest. She spoke of the apparition next day. Some time after she heard that he had died at that moment.

M. Bertrand, aged nineteen, dreamt that a cousin, a sub-lieutenant in the infantry at Tonquin, was surrounded by enemies, defending himself. He vanished in a cloud. He told the dream to his mother and sister and thought no more of it. Three weeks later they heard of the cousin's death on April 30, 1888, at Yon Luong, on the date of the dream (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armies).

On the night of July 13-14, 1916, Sergeant Jean Jules Bigard of the 124th Regiment of infantry, while on leave, dreamt that

1Emma Burger was in my service for fifteen years, and her good faith is not to be doubted. (Ch. Richet.)

he had lost both legs in action and that the registrar's clerk gave the death-certificate to his parents. He laughed at the grisly tale and told his dream to his father and mother, who thought nothing of it. A short time later he learned that his uncle, also named Jean Jules Bigard, had been killed at Biache, both legs having been blown off by a shell (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armies).

Mr. Beresford Christman heard the following rather startling story told by his uncle, J., to his father, G. The two brothers, J. and G., were in their cabin on the way to St. Thomas. The night was calm and the moon bright, almost like daylight. They were awaked. (By what?) Both then saw for a short time (that seemed long to them), the figure of their father, which they recognized. The form raised a hand and showed the sons that its eyes were shut. They noted the facts in the log-book. It seems that the vision coincided to a minute with the death of the father of J. and G. Christman (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 17).

A very interesting fact was related to Sir Oliver Lodge by Lieutenant Larkin of the Flying Corps (Jour. S. P. R., July, 1919, 76). On the 17th of December, 1918, Lieutenant D. M. Connell came to Lieutenant Larkin's room and said that he had to take an aeroplane to Tadcaster, but would be back at tea-time. About three hours later, Larkin being in his room sitting at the fireside, the door opened and Connell appeared, saying gaily, "Hello, boy!" Larkin turned, saw Connell in aviator's dress, and said, "Back already?" Connell replied, "It is all right, I made a good trip." He shut the door and was gone; it was then 3.30. Larkin went to the mess-room and was surprised not to see Connell. During the evening they learned that Connell had crashed near Tadcaster at 3.25. It cannot be supposed that Larkin had spoken to some other officer, mistaking him for his friend Connell; the room was small and well lit.

Mr. Vicary Boyle at Simla saw in a dream his father-in-law, who lived at Brighton, stretched pale on the bed tended by his wife. The vision soon disappeared. Mr. Boyle went on sleeping, but on waking was firmly persuaded that his father-in-law had died, though he was unaware of any illness and had not been thinking of him. Mr. Boyle's father-in-law had died nine hours before the dream (Myers, Human Personality, i, 138).

Mrs. Collyer, of New Jersey, on January 3, 1856, feeling poorly, went to bed early. She sat down on her bed and saw her brother

Joseph standing near the door. She said, "He looked at me gravely and sadly, his head was bandaged and he was wearing a white garment, like a surplice, but very soiled." At that very moment there had been a collision between two vessels on the Mississippi 1,080 miles away. Mrs. Collyer's brother Joseph, who commanded the steamboat Alice, was killed by the fall of the mainmast on his head. He was in his nightgown, having gone to sleep in his cabin before the accident (Telepathic Hallucinations, Ft. Tr., 117).

Mme. Couesnon, of Jassy, when half asleep, sees a friend of hers, A., sitting on his bed in night attire, saying, "Oh! I am in pain." It was then 2 a.m. That night A. died at 2.20 in the Tyrol (Flammarion, 419).

In 1913 P. Cotte, a student of horticulture at Villepreux, was in bed and just going to sleep when he saw a dim form leaning on the cross-rail of his bed. As it became clearer he recognized his foster-brother, A., aged thirty-five and a long sufferer from an incurable malady. He recognized the voice, which said, "How are you, Pierre? Adieu. I am going." C. then sat up in bed and called to his friend but the form had disappeared. The apparition coincided exactly with the time of death (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Arniees).

Lieutenant R. Martin, being convalescent, was anxious about his best friend from whom he had not heard for eight days. He says: "I had a dream; my friend appeared to me. He seemed in a hurry and said, 'Why don't you come with me? Are you dotty?' I was struck by the new decoration he was wearing. I told this dream to two friends next morning. I afterwards learned that my friend had been killed by a shell at Verdun at 5 p.m. some hours before my dream. I am a mathematical student at the Sorbonne; I never believed a word about occult sciences" (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armces).

M. Conil, then a child of eleven, saw in a dream his dying uncle, and heard his words as if he were in the room. The uncle died at 2 a.m., just when young Conil woke up. He says, "I heard his words distinctly and could repeat them, for the vision made such an impression on me that it seems like yesterday." All was exactly as seen and heard (Flammarion, 454).

Mrs. Cox relates the following: "On the 21st of August, 1869, about 9 p.m., I was in my bedroom when my little nephew, aged seven, ran in and said, 'Oh, aunt, I have just seen my father walk round my bed/ He was so frightened that he would not go back to his room and I had to take him into my bed. Towards midnight, I was not asleep, and saw my brother, who was at Hongkong, quite clearly near the chimney-piece and mortally pale. I was so frightened that I hid under the bedclothes. A little later I heard his voice call me by name three times. When I looked up he had gone. I noted down the facts." Mrs. Cox's brother died suddenly the same day at Hongkong of sunstroke (Telepathic Hallucinations, 372).

The wife of Colonel Craigie, in India, at 10 p.m., was about to undress when her daughter, who was with her, said, "Oh, mother, there is Mr. B.! Yes, don't you see him? He is saying, 'Good-bye, sissy, good-bye.' Now he is going. He is gone." The house was searched, Mr. B. was not there; he had killed himself the same day at 8 p.m. (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 581).

On the 13th of November, 1914, at Fez, Lieutenant C. of the Foreign Legion woke up, sobbing, and said to his comrade, M., sleeping in the same room, "I have had a horrible dream; some disaster has befallen one of my brothers, I don't know which, but I am sure." M. wrote this to his colonel, from whom I have this account: Commandant C, the brother of Lieutenant C, was killed in action at Elhenni (Morocco) on the same day, probably a few hours before the dream.

Mrs. H. D. dreamt that she saw a friend of hers, Maria, playing chess with Dr. D., but wearing a thick black veil. Mrs. D. said, "You will lose if you keep on that veil." Maria answered, "It is because I am dead. Look!" She raised her veil and Mrs. D. saw a death's-head with empty eye-sockets. In the morning she received a telegram, "Come quickly. Maria has died in the night." Maria was apparently in perfect health (Flammarion, 430).

Mr. D., a barrister in whom Mrs. Sidgwick has full confidence, had thirty years ago a friend, X. Y., whom he often saw. He says, "I knew he might die suddenly, but he seemed in his usual health. On the 7th I was in his room a long time chatting on various matters. He was in good spirits, and I went home at bedtime. On the morning of the 8th I woke, distressed. Day had dawned and in my dream I saw X. Y. lying on the floor, his knees drawn up, his hands thrown back and his jaw fallen. I woke my wife, saying, 'I have seen X. Y. dead on the floor.' She replied, 'Oh, you are dreaming.' I went to sleep again. But at eleven o'clock, X. Y. not having come to the office, and his housekeeper having had no answer to her knock on his door, I got a ladder to enter by the window. X. Y. was dead on the floor exactly as I had seen him in my dream. From that day to this I have been certain that it was no dream. I was not unconscious from the moment I opened my eyes and saw the apparition. I had an indescribable feeling of distress, just as one might on waking startled and seeing a terrible sight. This happened thirty-three years ago and every detail is as clear in my memory as if it were yesterday/'

Another, Mr. D., dreamt that he saw one of his work-people, R. Mackenzie, who said, "I have not done what I am accused of; I am innocent, you will soon know.,, The dream was hardly ended when Mrs. D. came into her husband's room to tell him that a tragedy had taken place, Mr. Mackenzie had committed suicide. "No," said her husband, "he has just told me that he is innocent." Mackenzie, in fact, had swallowed aqua-fortis in mistake for whisky (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 324).

Mme. Deupes, at Nice, in the middle of the night, heard distinctly a voice calling her by name, "Marie, Marie." She got up and awoke her husband, who was sleeping in the next room, asking if he had called her. On his denial she went to sleep again. Once more the voice called her, and she said to her husband, "I am frightened; light the candle." She passed the rest of the night with her husband. She said to him, "Remember, we shall hear of the death of M. Gautier at Marseilles, I think I recognized the tone of his voice."

M. Gautier had died at the time that Mme. Deupes heard him (Flammarion, 132).

The Abbe Dontaz, priest of Domdidier, near Fribourg, Switzerland, then a young man of eighteen, dreamt twice running that he saw his sister dying. His father appeared to him, saying, "Your sister Josephine is dying; but your mother does not know." Next morning on going to college he received a letter from his father containing the same words (Flammarion, 132).

A most remarkable monition is given (Flammarion, La Mort et son Mystbre, p. 172). To understand it fully the original must be referred to. On Saturday, January 3d, Mr. Dickinson, a Newcastle photographer, received, at 8 a.m., a visit from a Mr. Thompson, whose portrait he had taken. He referred to his book for the name and address, and said to Mr. Thompson, "If you will call again in a few days you shall have the proofs." Mr. Thompson then left. The assistant, on being spoken to, was surprised, Mr. Thompson's father having called the previous day to press for the proofs.

It was proved (1) that on January 3d Mr. Thompson was seriously ill of typhoid fever and likely to die during the day; (2) that in his delirium he continually spoke of the photographs and that was why his father had enquired; and (3) that the person seen by Mr. Dickinson could only be Mr. Thompson's double (A. S. P., ii, 310). This mysterious case is very well supported by proofs that define it as an objective phenomenon.

Mr. Charles Demay, a professor at Dijon, saw one of his colleagues, G., at Paris on July 10th, who made an urgent request that Mr. Demay could not consent to. G., despairing, left him at 11.30 p.m., near the St. Louis bridge. In the night of the 12th-13th July, Mr. Demay being at Soulancourt, 210 miles from Paris, dreamt that he was in a boat on the Seine at the St. Louis bridge, and that he was trailing his hand in the water; that it was bitten by a fish; on raising his hand the fish's head became that of G. Mr. Demay woke up and looked at the time, 2.20 a.m. He told the dream to G.'s sister, and a few days later learned that G. had thrown himself into the river on the night of July 12th-13th and had been taken from the water at 2.30 a.m. (Boirac, A. S. P., xxii, 1912, 178). This is a striking case of symbolical cryptesthesia.

Justinus Kerner relates that Angelica Hauffe had a waking vision of a coffin and pall on three successive days preceding the death of her father whom she did not know to be ill, but with whom she connected the vision (Secrcss of Prevorst, tr. fr., p. 61).

Kerner also relates the story of a Mr. Hubschmann, of Stuttgart. One morning at dawn his children woke him, saying, "Grandfather has come." This was not the case, but a few days later his brother wrote from Strasburg expressing much anxiety about their father, as he thought he had seen and recognized him on the same day as the children thought they had seen their grandfather at Stuttgart. Mr. Hubschmann senior had died in Bothnia on the same day as the apparitions at Stuttgart and at Strasburg.

Mrs. Duck, at 10 a.m., picking up sticks in a wood, saw her husband, David Duck, and called to him, "Oh, David, what brings you here?" She went home and evinced no surprise when told that he had been run over by a carriage and killed. She said, "I knew it; there was no need to tell me. I saw his ghost" (Tel. Halluc, 257).

The sister-in-law of Mr. Dyne, of London, saw during the day of December 16, 1875, a dead man, with open eyes, lying on a narrow bed. The room was bare, without carpet or furniture. She thought of Mr. X., who had done her some kindnesses, and had gone abroad about a year previously. On the same day, ten hours earlier, Mr. X. had died in a little village hospital, in a room exactly as seen by Mrs. Dyne (Tel. Halluc., 84).

M. E., a sub-lieutenant of engineers, returning from leave, while driving from the train to meet the regimental train, saw clearly a grave and cross bearing the words, "X., adjudant in the

company of engineers, killed on the field of honour, June 14,

1917." This was unlikely, for X., the senior section commander, being thirty-seven years of age and father of a family, had been given a post of less danger than others. He had been killed June 7, 1917 (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

Mme. Galichon, at Paris, dreamt on the night of November 8-9, 1916, that her grandson, a cadet in the Sixth Battalion of the Chasseurs Alpins, entered her drawing-room like a whirlwind and went out again as quickly. The impression being very clear, she told her servant of the dream. She soon received the official notification that her grandson had been killed by a shell at St. Pierre-vast on the evening of November 8th (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

Mme. Escourru, looking at the portrait of her son, an officer of Zouaves, then in Mexico, saw one of the eyes injured and the face streaming with blood. The portrait seemed as if alive, one eye being gouged out. It was probably about 1 p.m., being after lunch. On the same day, Palm Sunday, March 29, 1863, Captain Escourru had been struck by a bullet in the left eye, at 5 p.m. This gives a difference of six hours, for 1 p.m. at Paris corresponds to 7 a.m. in Mexico. This case has been investigated with great care by Dr. Dariex, who visited M. and Mme. Escourru several times (A. S. P., 1891, 152).

C. Flammarion, in the Revue Spirite, lxiv. 2d of January, 1921, reports a remarkably similar case, the authenticity of which seems to me weak, for no documents are available and the date is wrong, March 17th for the assault of La Puebla which took place on March 29th. The story is, that in 1863, the Baroness de Boisleve received many guests to dinner, among others General Fleury and President Devienne. Suddenly on entering the drawing-room, Mme. de Boisleve saw her son standing before her with his left eye bleeding. Her son was a lieutenant of hussars in Mexico. She fell on the floor in a faint. Eight days later she learned that her son had been killed in the assault on La Puebla by a bullet in the left eye.

The similarity in the two cases is so great that I suspect that the story refers to one and the same person, though Flammarion adds: "Dr. Nelaton gave a written account (proces-verbal) of the event in the handwriting of President Devienne, and countersigned by all the guests." It would be necessary that this document should be produced before we could be sure that this is not a version of the Escourru case.

This case shows how necessary it is to demand documents, and to check every statement. The S. P. R. is perfectly right to insist on proofs and attestations; there are never too many, nor even enough.

Mrs. Eustance, on her death-bed, spoke insistently of a fatherin-law whom she called "Uncle Done." While she was dying, Mr. Done, who knew her to be very ill, heard a voice calling him, "Uncle, uncle"; and at the same time his young niece, who lived with him, heard herself called, "Rosie, Rosie." She left her room in the middle of the night, thinking that her uncle had called her, and met her uncle who also thought that he had been called (Tel. Halluc., 345).

Mr. Everitt was suddenly awaked in the middle of the night. He heard a noise in the room but could see nothing. Then his mother's voice spoke softly, saying "Tommy" three times, and added "Your mother has died." Mr. Everitt told this before hearing of his mother's death, which took place at the time.

Archdeacon Farber, awaking in the night, saw a friend sitting at the foot of his bed, dripping with water. The apparition shook its head without speaking. It returned twice that night. Soon after the news came that a short time before the apparition to Mr. Farber, his friend had been drowned while bathing (Tel. Halluc., 130).

Mme. Ulric de Fonvielle, the wife of the author of that name, had been a few minutes in bed, but was still awake when she saw the bed-curtain drawn aside, and a friend of her childhood with whom she had had a quarrel three years before appeared to her as clearly as in life, wearing a dressing-gown, and with her dark hair down on her shoulders. She looked fixedly at Mme. de Fonvielle, held out a hand, saying, "I am going. Can you forgive me?" Mme. de Fonvielle held out her hand but the vision disappeared. The clock struck twelve. Next morning while she was telling the story a telegram was received at La Haye, "Marie died last night at 11.45" (Flammarion, 80).

The following fact is reported by my friend, Gaston Fournier, who has several times shown me strong mediumistic powers. It is possible that his presence conduced to the result.

Dining with his friends M. and Mme. B., Gaston was surprised that a mutual friend, d'E., had not appeared as expected. The dinner went off merrily. Gaston and his hosts were to go to the theatre together; and madame went to her room to put on her hat. She gave a cry of fear; and said that standing before the mirror she had seen d'E. at the door reflected in the glass. He appeared pale and sad, and was wearing his hat. Mme. B., without turning round, said, "Oh, d'E., so you have come at last; sit down." As he did not reply, she turned round, and seeing nothing, cried out in fear. She insisted on knowing what had become of him. They went to his house; he had not gone out. No one answering the bell, they forced the door and found him dead by a pistol-shot. He had probably shot himself about 10 a.m. (A.S.P., 1921, i, 22).

M. Louis Noell, a chemist at Cette, states that when he was a student at Montpellier, on the night of November 23-24, he saw about 4 a.m., while half asleep, his sister, pale, bleeding, and inanimate, and heard her plaintive call, "Louis, my Louis, come to me 1" He was oppressed by the vision and told his comrades. In the evening his elder sister came in deep mourning, and told him that their sister Helena had died of acute diphtheria at Perpignan, November 23d, at 4 a.m. Telegrams had been sent him which he had not received. (It may be supposed, though it is unlikely, that Louis Noell had an access of somnambulism during the night, and had then read the telegrams which the servant had placed in a drawer.)

My friend, Manuel Tolosa Latour, a very distinguished physician of Madrid, when a child was awakened in the middle of the night by his mother weeping and saying to him, "Pray for your grandfather, who is dead." She had waked with a start, having seen her father dead, in a dream. The news was true; M. Tolosa Latour states that event preceded the dream by a few hours (A.S. P., 1891,i, 35).

Mrs. G., having gone to bed early but not yet asleep, saw by the light of a night-lamp the figure of Major G. pass across the end of the room. He wore his usual dress. She says, "It was neither a dream nor delirium nor fevered imagination"; the time was a little before 11 p.m. The major had died at 10.45; Mrs. G. knew him to be very ill, but had no close acquaintance with him and was not thinking of him (Tel. Halluc, 140).

Lady G., who had left her mother in good health, woke in the middle of the night and said to her husband, "My mother is ill; have the horses put to for me to go to her." When nearing her mother's house she met her sister's carriage. She also having been disquieted, had come. They arrived in time for the last moments of their mother who had been taken suddenly ill (Chevreul, On fie meurt pas, 40). Perhaps the two daughters on the last occasion that they had seen their mother had subconsciously observed some signs of impending illness.

Mrs. Gay, at Saint-Jean-de-Luz, had two monitory dreams, interesting as showing a gradual transformation from one personality to another. The first dream was of a Mr. X., about eighteen months dead. Little by little the lineaments changed to those of her father. The change took place several times in the course of the dream. In the morning a letter arrived intimating the death of her father.

On the 24th of March Mrs. Gay saw her father, then dead, accompanied by a Mr. L., whom Mrs. Gay knew very slightly. This dream made a profound impression on her, and she concluded that Mr. L. must have died. He had not died; but some days later she received a letter from him telling her that her brother, Captain Edmund, had died.

On April 5th, when they were still without news of Captain Edmund, and very anxious, Mrs. Gay's little girl, aged one year and four months, said that she had seen Uncle Edmund in her bye-bye, with a red stain on his head. Mr. L.'s letter reached her a few hours later, telling her that her brother, a captain in the artillery, had been killed by a fragment of shell that had struck him on the head March 23d.

Mr. Goodall woke up with the impression that he had said aloud, "I have lost my dear little May." Another voice that he did not recognize, said, "No, not May, but your youngest boy." A short time later this was confirmed (Human Personality, ii, 213).

Miss Gollin, on January 25, 1896, at 12.30, working at the office of the Evening Post (New York) felt that there was some one behind her chair. She turned and saw her fiancee dressed in black. The vision disappeared after a short time. She asked a companion, "Miss Burrows, did you see anyone behind my chair?" Miss Burrows saw no one. The young man died at that hour. He had been ill some days but Miss Gollin thought him only slightly indisposed (/. S. P. R.f May, 1908, 234). The testimony of Miss Burrows shows that the vision was entirely subjective.

Mrs. Green, in England, dreamt that she saw two women in a small carriage, that the horse fell into the water, and that both women were drowned. She did not recognize either, but saw the hats floating on the water. This case has been already described (p. 254). At the same hour both women, one of whom was a niece of Mrs. Green's, were drowned in Australia. The horse was drowned also. The bodies were located by the hats floating in the water. Mrs. Green had never seen her niece and therefore could not recognize her (A. S. P., i, 49). The abundance of detail makes this one of the most telling monitory dreams on record.

General Fitch, in Burma, on getting up one morning, saw a friend whom he thought far away enter his room in broad daylight, and then vanish. No one in the house had seen him enter or leave. He learned that his friend had died suddenly about the same time, six hundred miles away (A. S. P., 1891, i, 362).

Marian Griffiths left the family breakfast table one Sunday morning, went into the garden, and without ostensible reason looked long into a fountain there. Her sister came to look for her, and she said, "Something terrible has happened; oh, my poor dear H." Her brother H. was drowned while bathing in a shallow river. There was no reason that Marian should be anxious about him (A. S. P., 1891, i, 364).

Colonel H., in London, woke at dawn and saw in his room his brother officer, Major Poole, in khaki uniform and wearing a thick black beard, as Colonel H. had never seen him. The apparition was so clear that H. thought it real; he saw all the details of the uniform. He spoke and P. replied, "I am shot," raising a hand to his breast. "The general sent me forward." Colonel H. told the facts to some comrades, and the following morning came the news of the action in the Transvaal at which Major Poole had been killed by a shot through the right lung. The time coincided with the vision.

Mr. Marius S. Griffin, in Jamaica, saw in a dream an old lady for whom he had a great affection, dressed in white. The dream ended in a vision very sharply defined at the foot of his bed. He remarks, however, that the night being very dark he could not have seen a living person there. He noted the dream in his diary, and learned that his friend had died at the time he saw the apparition. She had said, shortly before her death, "Tell Marius that I thought of him" (Tel. Halluc, 160).

General H., in his tent at Bombay, saw his sister in night-attire at two o'clock in the afternoon. He wrote at once for news of her, and learned that she had died at the hour of the apparition. He says, "I am as sure of the fact as of my own existence" {Tel Halluc.} 246).

Mr. H., who was then at school in Geneva, relates that one morning one of his schoolfellows said aloud, before several persons, that he had seen the brother of one of the masters (that master being then absent from the school for a few days) stretched on the grass with a dark hole in his forehead. The dream made a great impression on the boys. On the next day they heard that Mr. X. had been killed by his gun going off as he was crossing a ditch, the charge entering his head. Mr. H. cannot state identity of time between the dream and the accident.

Suzanne H., an old servant of Mrs. A., married and went to live at a farm a long way from the town where Mrs. A. lived. One night she waked up and said to her husband, "Listen! Mrs. A. is calling me." The husband heard nothing and Suzanne was reassured; but Mrs. A. had been taken with sudden illness and died at the hour when Suzanne had heard her voice (Flammarion, L'Inconnu, 140).

Clovis Hugues, a distinguished poet, was imprisoned at Marseilles after the events of the Commune. His friend, Gaston Cremieux, condemned to death, was with him, and said, "When they shoot me I will come and prove to you the immortality of the soul by manifesting in your cell." "At dawn of day on November 30, 1871," says Clovis Hugues, "I was awakened by sharp little knocks on my table. The noise ceased and I went to sleep again.

A few moments later they began again. I jumped out of bed, and broad awake stood at the table. The knocks continued; this was repeated once or twice. At that moment Cremieux had just been shot" (L'Inconnu, 76).

M. Martin Halle, of Cette, dreamed that he saw a girl fall from a window. He told this "horrible dream" to his family. In the morning the cabman who usually came to fetch him failed to come, and another came in his stead, very late. That morning at 5 a.m.. the daughter of the cabman had fallen from a window and been killed (L'Inconnu, 460).

Mme. Hers, entering her room at 2.30 p.m., saw her mother on the bed in a frilled cap, dead. She sobbed and nearly fainted. A few minutes later a telegram was brought her from Strasburg telling her that her mother was very ill. She said, "She is dead, I have seen her." The elder lady had died at 3.30, Strasburg time. She had a frilled cap (L'Inconnu, 104).

The celebrated medium, D. D. Home, who gave the finest examples known of ectoplasmic forms, showed occasional lucidity. He states that at the exact time of the death of Allan Kardec, one of the first promulgators of the spiritist doctrine, he received the communication, "I regret having taught the spiritist doctrine, Allan Kardec." The message was received in the presence of Lord Dunraven (Lights and Shadow's of Spiritualism, by D. D. Home). All the same, it would be interesting to know the precise conditions under which this message was transmitted.

M. Octave Houdaille was called to Mirecourt (Vosges) by the serious illness of his grandfather, left Paris with his brother George at 10 p.m., and went to sleep in the train. At 1 a.m. he awoke suddenly, hearing a deep sigh. He got up and called his brother, saying, "It is 1 o'clock, grandfather must be dead or dying. I have just heard his last sigh." In fact the death took place at 1.30 a.m. (A. S. P., 1891, 99).

Mrs. Hosmer, the sculptress, at Rome, waked at the moment that the clock struck three and saw inside her bed-curtains the form of a young Italian woman, Rosa, who had been her servant and whom she knew to be slightly ill. It seemed to her that Rosa said, "Adesso son felice, son contenta." Next morning she told her dream while at breakfast with Miss Lydia Child, who did not believe it. They sent, however, to get news of Rosa and found that she had died at 5 a.m. (Tel. Halluc, 146).

Mr. Hutchins died suddenly at Cardiff, forty-eight miles from the house where his wife was living. His son left in a carriage to take her the sad news. She met him at the door, saying, "Daniel, your father is dead." "How do you know that?" he asked. "He called me," she replied, "about 9 o'clock, and disappeared immediately, I have not slept since; he called me by name, 'Mary, Mary'" (Tel. Halluc, 297).

Dr. Jean, at Cogolin (Var), was called to attend a little boy aged about seven, delirious with fever. At 10 a.m. the child woke up, terrified, seeing water everywhere and crying, "Help," and saying that his father was drowning. In fact his father, going to Nice, was drowned at that same hour (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

Two employees at the same office, J. and F., were close friends. One day, F., having an attack of indigestion, did not go to the office, the doctor having ordered a few days' rest. In the evening J., on returning home, and sitting with his wife, saw distinctly his friend F., dressed as usual and with a stick in his hand, looking at him fixedly. The words of Job came to his mind, "A spirit passed before my face and the hair of my flesh stood up." He asked his wife the time. "Twelve minutes to nine," she replied. "Then it is at 8.48 that F. has died; I have just seen him." In fact F. died by the rupture of an aneurism between 8.35 and 9 p.m. (A. S. P., 1891, i, 301). This monition is one of the most remarkable by reason of the exactness of the details and unforeseeable nature of the event.

Mr. Jukes heard in a dream one of his comrades say to him, "Your father, Mark, and Harriet have both gone." He waked and his feeling was so strong that he wrote down the words. He was so moved that he did not go down to breakfast in the morning. At that time his father was dying of cholera in America, and his sister-in-law, Harriet, died two days later (Tel. Halluc., 126).

Mr. Grant woke up in the night feeling a presence in his room, but seeing nothing. He had the conviction that the father of his friend Bruce had died. He looked at the time — 12.14 a.m. In the morning he spoke of it to several persons, and in the evening noted in his diary that he had so spoken. It was not Mr. Bruce's father, but his own brother, who had died in China some hours before (Tel. Halluc, 93).

Mrs. L., at Farnborough, at 3 p.m., saw an old gentleman, dressed in a former fashion and carrying a cane, come into her room. In spite of the rain his clothes were not wet. She recognized her uncle and spoke to him as if he were a real person; but he, without answering, went out by the half-open door. The servants when questioned said they had seen no one. At that very time her old uncle, whom she did not know to be ill, died in Leicestershire {Tel. Halluc, 93).

Captain Lagarrue, at St. Louis (Senegal), was going to sleep when he felt a strong pressure on his chest. He raised himself on his elbow, rubbed his eyes, and saw his grandmother looking at him with dim eyes. He heard her say in a weak voice, "I come to bid you good-bye, dear boy, you will see me no more." He then said aloud, "Come, this is not a dream," and got up. The apparation had lasted some seconds only. The time agrees with that of the death of the captain's grandmother. She was of an advanced age, but her health gave no reason for disquiet (L'Inconnu, 182).

Jules Lermina reports the following case, not very evidential, told him by a person whom he knows well {A. S. P., 1895, 202).

"I had gone to fetch a dish from the kitchen, when I heard the voice of one of my cousins at the window. I raised my eyes and saw him nodding to me, and saying 'Good morning, Louie/ I answered, 'Good morning, Wenand/ and went to open the door to him. My father, surprised that the door should be opened when no one had rung, came to see. When I told him that I had seen Wenand, he said, That is impossible/ and told me that Wenand was dead, but that he, my father, had not wished to tell me before.,,

In despite of Mr. Carrington's authority I cannot place much reliance on the story he tells of Mrs. H., who would seem to be a woman of the working class. She saw her son, who was at the front, at her door, and was surprised not to see him that evening. She left the door open but he did not return. The next day he again appeared and was not seen again that day. On the next day he came for the third time. This time she said, "Now do not leave me, my son, sit down and take tea with me." Her son went up to the room, his mother following. He threw himself on the bed and disappeared, leaving the bed covered with blood. The first apparition coincided with the day of death. This story is so highly improbable from a psychological point of view that it cannot be accepted. At the very least some documentary evidence of Mrs. H/s state of mind is required.

In March, 1890, Countess Kapnist, on leaving the theatre with her sister, and being about to enter her carriage, stopped, seeing a diaphanous figure with indistinct outlines. The vision lasted a moment only, nevertheless the smallest details were distinguishable^— a large nose, hair parted at the side, blond beard somewhat scanty, no hat, and a brown overcoat. The sister of the countess saw nothing, though the latter had said to her, "Did you see nothing in front of you?" Some time later Countess Kapnist learned that a certain Mr. P., answering to the description, had died after a long illness, two days after the vision. Mr. P. had, in March, 1889, promised I. K., Countess Kapnist's sister, to appear before her, but not so as to frighten her (Human Personality, ii, 49).

Dr. Liebeault reports the case of Mrs. B., of New Orleans, who when magnetized by him soon gave proofs of lucidity by automatic writing. One morning she felt an impulse to write. The message purported to come from a certain Marguerite, who announced her death while at school in Coblentz. The death was verified as having taken place the same day (Phant. of the Living, i, 293).

One of my colleagues, a distinguished physician, in no way credulous, writes to me that one night he dreamed of a young friend of his, Mme. L., in tears and wearing a mourning veil. Next morning he told his dream and expressed his surprise that the young lady, who was usually gay and light-hearted, should have appeared in mourning. "Towards 8 a.m. my sister telephoned to us that her sister-in-law, Mme. L., had lost her husband after an operation for peritonitis. He adds that he had not seen M. and Mme. L. for a fortnight, and that his sister (their only relation in common), did not know that M. L. was ill. This monition is interesting as being symbolical. The image of the dead man himself was not presented; it was an information, and this is important as regards theory, for it seems to prove that so-called apparitions are not phantoms of the dead, but only monitions.

Mrs. Frances Lightfoot was awakened by a loud noise. It seemed to her that her door, which was locked, was violently opened and that someone or something entered her room. A figure appeared, lying over her bed, and an imperious voice said, 'Trances, I want you. Come with me at once." She then thought of Mrs. Reed, a dear friend in India, and imagined she must be dead. She noted down the dream in her diary. Next day she told her sister that Mrs. Reed was dead. The vision took place eight to nine hours after Mrs. Reed's death (Tel. Halluc, 154).

At Holywood, Mrs. Kerr dreamed that one of her sons, a locomotive driver, had fallen from his engine, had his head and leg crushed against the parapet of a bridge, and that the train had passed over his body. The time was about 10.50 p.m. A few minutes earlier, at Paisley, Edward Kerr had fallen from his tender at a bridge, his head and leg were crushed, and he died the following day.

This case was gone into by Sir James Crichton Browne and Dr. Clarke, in the Am. S. P. R. (November, 1905, 145); and though the incident dates back ten years, the details are so precise, and Mrs. Kerr's good faith so evident, that it is difficult to dispute its authenticity.

Mme. de Langenest one morning at eight o'clock saw her uncle, M. Bonnamy, whom she thought to be in good health, standing before her in her room. She went to the other side of her bed and the phantom moved to the place where she had been standing. She went to find her husband on the ground floor, and again the phantom moved in front of her. She said, "Uncle, why have you come? Have you died?" The apparition vanished. Soon after there was a ring at the door, and Mrs. L. said to the servant, "Go and get the telegram, my uncle is dead." He had died at 1.15 that night (A. S. P., 1900, x, 65).

Mrs. Macklin saw on March 27-28, 1918, in a very vivid dream, her son David, a lieutenant of infantry, in the uniform of a private, which much surprised her. He was wearing a helmet, and she said, "Oh, David, why are you no longer an officer, why this Tommy's uniform?" She told her dream to two persons who witness to it. On April 3d she received the news of her son's death on the night of March 27-28. His body was not found: in night-attacks the officers often wore the uniform of private soldiers (/. P. R., January, 1919, 3-7).

Mr. Marchant, of Redhill, saw someone come into his room at 2 a.m. The name of Robinson Kesley came to his mind, though he had seen him but once in twenty years, and never thought of him. He knew him by his long, tangled hair. The apparition looked at himself in the mirror; and as soon as Mr. Marchant spoke he slowly sank into the floor. Mr. Marchant told his dream to several persons, before he learned that Kesley had died at 2 a.m. the same night {Tel. Hallac, 12).

Moritz quotes the story of a woman who had received a letter from her husband telling her that all was well; nevertheless she dreamed that night that she saw him dying with a large wound in his side, with an officer beside him. This was true. Four months later she saw an officer at church and recognized him as the one who had been with her husband in his last moments (quoted by J. C. Passavant from Unters, iiber den Lebensmagnetismusj 2d edit., Frankfurt, 1837, 132).

These old stories are probably true in the main, for they agree well with more recent ones; but taken by themselves, they do not carry conviction, for in those days the same care was not taken as now in attestation and scrutiny.

Dr. Weir Mitchell states a case that he had from his father, the doctor of a lunatic asylum. The wife of one of the patients had died, and the doctor went to tell the husband, who said, "You need not tell me; my wife has died. I know it; she came to me last night and spoke to me." On enquiry Dr. Mitchell found that the patient had been speaking aloud during the night. The warder came to silence him, and was rebuked by the patient for driving away the wife who had come to see him and tell him of her death (Hyslop, Science and a Future Life, 51).

In James Hyslop's book many interesting examples will be found; these are worthy of mention, both because he has chosen cases in which the intelligence and good faith of the percipients are above reproach, and because his acute and clear-sighted criticism deserves to be taken as conclusive.

Mr. Andrew Lang states in his article on Apparitions in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (10th Ed.) that he saw an eminent member of an English university at the moment that this person was dying one hundred miles away(?) (N. B. This does not appear in the article as given in the eleventh edition. — Transl.).

M. Keulemans, the artist, heard when half awake in Paris one morning the voice of his son Isidore, and saw him smile, both seeming more real than in an ordinary dream. During the day he again heard the voice, and told his wife that the child must have died. The child had really died in London at the hour of the apparition.

James Cotter Morrison and Professor Estlin Carpenter give parallel experiences of their own.

Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, brother-in-law to Mr. Darwin, reports a veridical vision with very precise details that occurred to his sister-in-law.

The Marquis of Bute and Dr. Ferrier have described the phantom of a dead person whom they did not know. Their description is quite sufficient to warrant the assertion that the hallucination was veridical.

The Rev. Mark Hill, one evening when sitting down to supper saw a tall man about to attack him. He jumped up, went to the other side of the table, and threw a glass at the figure, which vanished. He then thought of one of his uncles, who had, in fact, died that day, April 5, 1864 (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 1886).

Dr. F. de M., a student of medicine at Paris, dreamed that his uncle in Havana, who stood to him in the place of a father, was about to die. When the servant entered his room in the morning, he found Mr. F. in deep distress, and was told of the dream. The coincidence of the day is exact, if not the hour (Flammarion, 413).

Sergeant Negre heard his wife sobbing in her sleep by his side on the night of November 8, 1912. He waked her, and she said, "My brother Alexis is dead." This was true. A month later, at 11 p.mv she was again weeping and when her husband asked what was the matter, she said, "Mother is dead, I am sure of it." This also was the fact. The brother died on November 8th and the mother on December 8, 1912.

Mme. A. Eugenie, of Lavadina (Italy) on June 8, 1916, thought in her sleep that she heard the step of her son Alphonse, a soldier in the Fifty-fifth Regiment. She got up, saying, "At last, dear son, I can kiss you." She seemed to feel her son sighing in her arms, but it was only a shade. Convinced that he was dead, she had the prayers for the dead offered. Alphonse, unknown to his mother, had embarked on the Principe Umberto, which was sunk June 8th between 8 and 10 p.m. (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

Mrs. Palliser, a widow, saw in a dream her only son, Matthew, dead by drowning. Much distressed, she sought out Mr. Clarke, a merchant of Hull, among other persons. He tried to calm her and promised to write to New York to get news; and for a month Mrs. Palliser came to see him daily. At last news came that her son had been drowned on the day of the dream (Tel. Halluc., 150).

At Chicago, Mrs. Paquet, about to pour out tea, saw her brother, a stoker on a small steamboat, caught in the bight of a rope, thrown overboard, and drowned. His trousers were turned up so that the white lining could be seen. He was wearing no coat, only a sailors jumper. All these details were exact. When Mr. Paquet heard the news he broke it to his wife by saying, "Edmund is ill in hospital." She replied, "No, he is drowned, I saw him fall into the water" (A. S. P., 1891, i, 208).

M. George Parent, mayor of Wiege (Aisne) travelling in a carriage by night, heard his name pronounced in a stifled voice. He stopped the carriage and got out but could see nothing. When about to get in again he heard his name as if spoken by some one in the carriage, and recognized the voice of an old nurse who was very fond of him. As soon as he got in he again heard the voice speaking low. About a hundred yards further on he went into an inn to write this down in his pocket-book. On returning home he found that old Sophia had died (Flammarion, 100).

An eminent psychologist, M. Pieron, relates a remarkable monition, with full details {A. S. P., xii, 303-309). On June 25, 1902, a young woman, X., was working in his psychological laboratory at the asylum of Ville-juif. She seemed very depressed, and could not be consoled, having heard, at seven minutes past three, the voice of Jeanne, one of her friends, whom she knew to be very ill. On that day at three o'clock, Jeanne had cried out for her friend, X., and in dying she had asked for silence that she might hear her friend come to her. At 4.06 she felt herself

flying, and said, "If it were to go and see "; she could not

finish, but gasped and died. X. knew that death was near, but thought Jeanne might yet live for some time. M. Pieron's very circumstantial account mentions other facts that might be explained by Jeanne's cryptesthesia; but they may be coincidences. Still, the fact remains that X. showed decided cryptesthesia, along with a very clear auditory monition.

Mr. Rawlinson (Cheltenham), in his dressing-room one morning, saw distinctly his friend X. to whom he had not written for a long time. At that same moment X. was dying (Tel. Halluc, 231).

At the beginning of August, 1878, my grandfather, M. Charles Renouard, aged eighty-four, was slightly ill, but the indisposition did not prevent his remaining up and going about as usual. He was then living at a country house at Stors (Seine-et-Oise) with Mme. Cheuvreaux, his sister-in-law. On Sunday, August 11th, I went to Stors and found him well. It was settled that we were to go from Meudon near Paris where we were living to visit him for a few days the following week. On the morning of Saturday, August 17th, at 7 a.m., as I was dressing, my wife woke up weeping and said, "It is terrible, I have just seen your grandfather very ill in bed and your mother standing by him" (Proc. S. P. R., 1888, 162). I took no heed of the dream; at that time I did not believe at all in veridical dreams. I easily reassured my wife and we left in a carriage for Paris. I remember we were quite in good spirits. On reaching Paris we found a telegram telling us that on the previous night my grandfather had died suddenly of heart disease about 3 a.m. We did not know that my mother was at Stors; it was a chance visit. The dream was about four hours after the death.

M. R., a clerk in the postal administration, when about to enter an omnibus to return home on March 16th, suddenly saw his mother lying back in her bed, very ill. He seemed to himself to say, "Wait, mother, I am coming." It was about five minutes past six. On reaching home he found a telegram announcing his mother's sudden and serious illness. He then told L., who was with him, of the vision, and L. said that M. R. looked very strange. Mme. R. was taken ill on the morning of March 16th and died at 10 p.m. {A. S. P., 1899, ix, 77).

M. Riondel, barrister at Montelimar, on the night of April 1-2, 1894, heard a loud and unusual noise that woke him and his mother also at 1.45 a.m., with a feeling of fear. At the same hour his brother, who had just written that he was in good health, had died suddenly at Marseilles (A. S. P., 1895, v, 200-202).

Mr. Runciman gives precise details of a monition (Phantasms of the Living, i, 433). It began by a dream in which he saw Mr. J. H. Haggit lying in bed. He awoke, asking himself, "Am I awake or dreaming?" There was a little light in the room from the gas-jet. He writes, "I was as much awake as I am now while writing, when the apparition vanished. I was about to speak to him when all disappeared. I spoke of it to several persons." Mr. Haggit, whom he thought he saw, had died the same day at the same hour; he had been ill, but not seriously.

In November, 1904, there were riots at Rio de Janeiro with much bloodshed. Among the students at the military college was young Sylvestre Cavalcante who was killed by a bullet in the head on the night of November 14-15 at 11 p.m. exactly. On that night, about 2 a.m., Mme. Rieken, whose daughter Maria Luiza was betrothed to Cavalcante, saw him enter her room at

Copacabana (Brazil) wearing a khaki uniform, different from his usual uniform, with a red handkerchief round his neck. He said, "Guarda Mimi" (take care of Mimi), that being the name by which he called his betrothed. He then vanished. Next morning Mme. Rieken told the vision to her husband and her son. At that time no one at Copacabana knew of the rising at Rio, nor, a fortiori, of the death of Cavalcante (/. S. P. R., April, 1905, 59).

M. Anatole France tells in his vivid style a monition related to him by his grandmother (Le Livre de mon ami, 98).

"On the night of the 9th to the 10th Thermidor of the year III (July 27, 1794) we had heard of stirring events — the arrest of Robespierre and the tumults in the Convention and in the city, but nothing more. My grandmother," says Anatole France, "kept her room with my father, Mme. de Laville and young Amelie, her sister. At half-past one in the morning, Amelie, leaning over a mirror, seemed to be looking on a tragic scene and cried out, 'I see him! I see him! How pale he is! The blood is flowing from his mouth! His teeth and jaws are shattered! God be praised! The bloodthirsty wretch will drink no more blood but his own'; then she cried out with horror and fainted. At the same hour Robespierre's jaw was shattered by a pistol-shot at the Hotel-de-Ville."

Of course this story, narrated a century after the events, must be accepted with all reserve.

Mme. S., of Luxeuil, when half asleep, saw her brother in a stone sarcophagus like those in the museum of Roman remains. It seemed to be closing in upon him, while he looked at her at first imploringly and then resignedly. Mme. S. then woke up, at 3.30 a.m. At that hour her brother died. He had been ill for some time (Flammarion, 408).

Miss Sanders when awake one morning heard herself repeatedly called by her Christian name. She recognized the voice of a friend of whom she had not thought for a long while. She noted the date (October 27, 1879) in her diary. He had died of cholera in India on that day {Tel. Halluc, 296).

M. Marcel Serizolles, a magistrate and man of letters, cites some cases of monitions. During an excursion in the mountains he felt a blow on his neck. He stopped and said aloud, "There is a message for me in the town; some misfortune has befallen me." His father, seemingly in good health, had died suddenly, about three hundred and sixty miles away. The telegram had reached the town of L., where M. Serizolles was staying, at the time of the monition (A. S. P., 1895, v, 277).

The wife of M. Serizolles also had a monition. Travelling to Granada, she dreamt, and told her husband, that she had seen Mme. de B. ill and dying. Mme. de B., though near her confinement, was otherwise in good health, but had died at that time (exact dates are wanting).

M. Serizolles relates another interesting monitory dream. His father was a magistrate at Montauban, and among his relations was a young barrister named L. In 1883, after the death of M. Serizolles senior, M. L. was appointed judge at N. (Dordogne). Two or three years later M. Serizolles dreamt that he saw his father as if floating in a cloud, from which a form resembling M. L. emerged, and the sleeper clearly heard his father say, "So it is your turn, L.," who answered, "Yes, it is I"; and they shook hands. Some days after, M. Serizolles learned that M. L., though still young, had died that day.

The wife of Marshal Serrano, Duke of La Torre, relates that her husband, being very ill, and awaking from sleep induced by morphia, rose up, calling out loudly in the silence of the night, "Quick, let some one take my horse, and hurry to the Prado, the King is dead." He fell back, but repeated in a weaker voice, "My uniform, my sword! the King is dead." At that time Alphonso XII was dying on the Prado, at some distance from the part of Madrid where Serrano was. This fact is cited with all necessary reservations (Flammarion, 439).

Kate Sherman felt a hand on her shoulder as she lay in bed; she looked up and saw her brother Stewart. She woke her sister, who saw nothing and laughed at her fears. She went to sleep again with her head under the coverlet, and again saw her brother, whose image persisted for a time and gradually disappeared. She awoke her sister again. Stewart died the same night, July 4-5, at 1 a.m.

The following is from Victor Hugo's Chose s Vnes. It is reproduced textually. The case is doubly interesting, for besides the fact of the monition it was addressed to a person who (though only slightly ill) was about to die, and was asked, "Are you coming?"

"On the 27th of November last, an old woman named Mme. Guerin, sixty-six years of age, living at No. 34 (fourth storey) in the street Fosses-du-Temple, was slightly ill with an attack which her doctor thought to be indigestion. It was five o'clock in the morning; her daughter, a widow named Mme. Guerard, had risen early, lit her lamp, and was working by the fire at her mother's bedside. While working, the daughter said to her mother, 'Why, Mme. Lanne must have come back from the country.' (This Mme. Lanne, a good-natured stout woman of sixty, had retired from a grocery business at the corner of the streets St. Louis and St. Claude, with an income of 40,000 francs and lived on the first floor in the Boulevard Beaumarchais, in a new house.) Mme. Guerard added, T must go and see her today.' 'No use to do that,' said her mother. 'Why, mother?' 'She died an hour ago.' 'Why, mother, what do you mean? Are you dreaming?' 'No, I am quite awake, I have not slept, but as four o'clock struck I saw Mme. Lanne pass, and she said to me, " 'I am going, are you coming?" ' The daughter thought that her mother had dreamed it; and later in the day went to see Mme. Lanne, only to find that she had died at 4 a.m. The same evening Mme. Guerin vomited blood, and the doctor said, 'She will not last twenty-four hours.' The next day at noon she had a second attack and died.

"I knew Mme. Guerin, and the story was told me by Mme. Guerard, a pious, good woman who never told a lie in her life" (Victor Hugo).

Mr. J. Addington Symonds, while still at Harrow School, woke in the middle of the night and felt he must look round. He then saw between him and the door Dr. Macleane, dressed as a clergyman, who said to him, "I am going on a long journey; look after my son." Then he vanished. Dr. Macleane died the same night at Clifton. Young Symonds knew of his chronic illness, but did not think him more ill than usual (Hyslop, Science and a Future Life, 50).

Mr. Sings, a sailor of little education, left his father, also a sailor, one Good Friday, to embark on a large sailing-ship. After some very stormy days, in heavy weather, he saw his father on the bridge near him, saying, as usual with him, "Look to your helm, Joe." He continued to see his father walking to and fro on the bridge for three hours. His father several times clapped him on the shoulder, and told him to be careful at the wheel. Joe felt that his father must have been drowned to appear thus to him, and would no longer remain at the helm. The date and hour agree with the time of the father's death (Tel. Halluc, 318).

Mr. Shirving, master mason at Winchester Cathedral, felt himself irresistibly impelled to leave his work, which was pressing; went home at 10 a.m. and found that his wife had been run over by a carriage and was calling him (Chevreul, On ne meurt pas, 31).

Mme. de Thiriat, the aunt of M. d'Arbois de Jubainville, who tells the story, was dying and seemed, four or five hours before her death, to become composed. She said, "I am calling Midon to my funeral." Two hours later, Midon, an old servant who lived some six miles away, arrived dressed in black, saying that she had heard Mme. de T. calling her to her death-bed (Flammarion, L'Inconnu).

Mme. Storia gives a very circumstantial dream (too long to be detailed here), in which she saw her brother, William, lying on the ground with the smokestack of a locomotive near his head. Her brother's death in a railway accident took place the same day at 9.55 on July 18, 1874 {Tel. Halluc, 112).

Colonel Swiney, at Shorncliffe Camp, saw in the daytime his brother (who was in India), approach him, and then vanish. He told his comrades. Taking account of the longitude, the hour of the death and of the apparition coincide {Tel Halluc, 253).

M. Tamburini, professor at the University of Rome, reports several cases {A. S. P., 1893, iii, 292): Mme. V. Guicciardi, the wife of the principal doctor of the asylum at Rome, while sleeping at home, heard herself called loudly by name. She went into the adjoining room to find her husband, and returned to sleep. She then dreamt that her friend G., who was ill, but had written two days before that she was slightly better, had died. It was 6 a.m. At eight o'clock a telegram arrived announcing the death.

The next case is probably not a coincidence, though coincidence is quite possible. A female patient in the lunatic asylum at Reggio died on May 21, 1892, at 11 a.m. Her husband had not asked for news of her since December 20, 1890; but on the 23d of May a letter arrived from Mantua from the husband saying that on the 21st he had felt a disturbance presaging some misfortune.

Dr. Giacchi, when a student, aged eighteen, at Pisa, saw his father, pale and dying, who said to him, "Kiss me for the last time, I am about to leave you forever." He felt cold lips on his mouth. With no other reason for apprehension, he left for Florence next morning, and found that his father had died at the time of the vision. This took place in 1853 when telegraphic communication was imperfect. However, Dr. Giacchi's story refers to an event so long past that it must be taken with some caution.

Dr. G. Orsi saw in a dream (July 2, 1858) the Adria Doria, on which his brother had embarked, caught in a storm. The dream was repeated on the two following nights. He saw the wreck, but felt that his brother was among the saved. On July 8th he received a telegram from Gibraltar announcing the loss of the ship in the storm of the 2d and 3d of July, but that his brother Alexander was safe.

Dr. Cornis, of Parma, relates that his sister, being then very ill, was visited by her brother Henry, a lieutenant in the Bersaglieri, who was leaving for the war, but of this she was not told. Some time later, before her death, she awoke from a halfsleep saying, "Henry is killed." He had fallen at Custozza, June 24, 1866.

Mrs. Teale, whose son Walter was returning from the Soudan on sick leave to England, saw him bend over to embrace her and disappear. Walter had died on that day some five or six hours before {Tel Halluc, 280).

A medical lady, Marie de Thilo, at Lausanne, heard knocks at her door at 6 a.m. The door opened of itself and a form appeared covered with vaporous white stuff, like a veil over a black ground. "The cat in my room growled and hissed with all its hair on end/' Some time after Mme. de Thilo learned that one of her best friends, of whom she had not thought at the time of the apparition, had died of acute peritonitis in India on the night following the dream (Flammarion, 156). As there was no recognition no great importance can be attached to the dream as a monition; but the episode of the cat seems to show that the apparition was not perhaps entirely subjective; this episode was perhaps misinterpreted or exaggerated, and is insufficient to establish objectivity.

The soldier S. went to see one of his comrades in the ambulance, who, as S. was leaving, said to him, "Good-bye, and think of me." In the night of March 27th S. had a dream which he noted in his route-book: "March 28th, I saw G. dying, a bright light shone round him... his face was terribly thin and disfigured... I shall see him no more... I am afraid." On April 18th, "It is true then, he died thirteen days ago... no one near him to console his last moments, I saw him in his coffin, and choirboys in red tickling each other's necks and laughing." It would appear from S.'s letter that his friend died on March 28th (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armies).

The soldier D., schoolmaster of Lieuron (Ille-et-Vilaine), wrote from the front to his wife, "Perhaps you will say I am mad, but I think my mother has died... Tell me the truth." With the letter Mrs. D. received a telegram announcing the mother's death, though she had not been ill, but had resumed her work after a short indisposition (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

The son of M. Viaud, professor in a school at Bordeaux, had left with his regiment August 6, 1914, and news of him had come regularly. "On the 22d of August at 9.15 p.m., having been impelled (by an external influence) to go to my bedroom, I had hardly laid my head on the pillow and switched off the light, when I saw clearly at the foot of the bed the image of my son with a large black patch covering his left eye... I was convinced that he had been mortally wounded during the day. The vision still persisting I mentally exclaimed 'Enough/ and the luminous appearance vanished. It was not a dream" (A. S. P., March, 1916, 60).

On August 24th there arrived a letter written on the 20th. Young Viaud was missing after the battle of August 22d in Belgium. No news has been since received, and the manner of his death is not known.

Corporal Lebrun had a dream or nightmare which moved him most profoundly. He noted the fact in his pocket-book, which has been lost. He dreamt that he was at a funeral, many persons in mourning, weeping, and he thought of a cousin to whom he was greatly attached. She had just died suddenly (Enquiry through the Bulletin des Armees).

M. Uranenko was asleep, and was waked by someone touching his back. He opened his eyes and saw his sister, aged fifteen, sitting on his bed; she said, "Good-bye, Nadia," and vanished. She had died at that hour, 5 a.m. (Flammarion, 436).

Mme. d'Ulric (the pseudonym of a distinguished writer), heard repeated knocks on her table during the night of July 1, 1919, about 11.30. She sat up to hear better. The rhythm was that with which her son when a tiny boy was used to say, "Maman, Maman," then the knocking, becoming stronger, displaced two small glass vases. She tried to persuade herself that it meant no bad news, but that night, her son, then a sergeant of infantry, had been killed (A. S. P., xxix, 24-29).

On November 8, 1864, in the morning, Sarah Wight heard herself called by name from outside. Mr. Hazhatt, who was with her, also heard it distinctly, but no one was there. The date of her mother's death agreed with the time (Chevreul, 49).

L. V., at Bordeaux, working at his table, had the feeling that the door had opened. He turned, and saw for a moment the form of his uncle, G. A quarter of an hour later he had a telegram telling him that his uncle had committed suicide. The monition was at 9.30, the suicide at 5 a.m. The telegram reached Bordeaux at eight o'clock (A. S. P., 1897, vii, 114).

Valentine C. had in her room a photograph of her friend Helena. One day having retired to her room after dinner, she was studying a problem of geometry, but felt constrained to look at the photograph. The eyelids seemed to move and the mouth to open as if about to speak. The clock struck eight. Thinking she must be dreaming, she rubbed her eyes and looked again. She distinctly saw the lips move, the eyes open widely, and then slowly close with a sigh. Much frightened, she dared look no more, went to bed, but could not sleep. A telegram telling her of Helena's death soon reached her. Helena, the day before her death, had repeatedly said, "Perhaps Valentine is looking at my photograph" (Flammarion, 165).

The next instance deserves note, though it is not told by the percipient, Dr. Vogler, but by a friend who had it from him. M. Yogler, travelling in Germany, heard the door at the foot of the stairs open and shut. Then dragging footsteps came along to the door of his room which opened, though there was no one to be seen, but the steps were still heard and seemed to approach the bed. At the same time he heard a deep sigh and recognized the voice of his grandmother, whom he had left quite well in

Denmark. He still saw nothing, but noted the time. It was proved that his grandmother had died at the same hour. The case is interesting, not only because of the recognition, but by the percipient's clear dissociation of the sensorial phenomena (Flammarion, 72).

Mr. W. dreamt, early in the night, that he saw an old lady with white hair but black eyebrows looking fixedly at him and nervously fingering the ribbons of her cap. He did not recognize her, but, still in the dream, his aunt came, and said, "What, John, don't you know your grandmother?" On waking he noted down the fact; and soon after learned that his grandmother had died, far away in the Isle of Wight. She had white hair, which her grandson, who had not seen her for a long time, did not know {Tel Halluc, 329).

The Rev. Mr. Wanley dreamt that he saw a friend, a professor of mathematics in Guernsey. In the morning he told his wife that he believed Mr. B. to be dead. The day, and probably the hour of death, were correct.

Mrs. Wheatcroft, whose husband was a captain in the Dragoon Guards, and had left for India, saw on the night of November 14-15, 1857, the form of her husband bending over her and trying to speak. This occurred twice. In the morning she told her mother, being sure that he was dead. A month later she received official notice of his death on November 15th. She insisted that the death must have been on the 14th, and after minute enquiry, this was confirmed. The case is extremely striking and deserves to be considered highly evidential, the metapsychic monition having actually led to a change in the date of the registry of deaths by the War Office (A. S. P., 1891, i, 51).

Mr. Williams was sleeping, his hands outside the coverlet, when he was waked by the sensation that his hands were held and pressed. He sat up and saw his young brother-in-law, aged nineteen, whom he knew to be extremely ill. He looked at him with affection and felt in no way frightened. The room was lit by the rising sun. He rose and told his wife, "I have seen George, he came for a minute at sunrise." In another part of London George expired in the arms of his father and mother, the former of whom said, "The sun rose just as our dear boy rose to the heavenly kingdom" (Tel Halluc, 142).

Mrs. Williams (another case) heard the voice of her son cry out, "Mother, Mother"; she felt a hand on her breast and saw the form of her son looking very ill. Mr. Williams, to whom she told her vision, advised her to put no faith in it. Her son died at sea of yellow fever at the same hour {Phantasms of the Living, i, 440).

Mr. Wingfield Baker saw in a dream, on the night of March 25-26, his brother Richard Wingfield Baker. The impression was so strong that he rose and went to see if his brother were not really there. He felt sure that some disaster had happened, and wrote in his note-book, "Apparition, night of Thursday, March 25, 1880, R. B. W. B. God forbid!" On that day his brother was killed in the hunting-field.

This monition is one of the most reliable on record, on account of the unforeseen nature of the event and the note taken at the time (A. S. P., 1891, i, 45).

Mrs. Wright left her little girl, aged four and a half, playing in the street. Crossing the yard a few minutes later, she saw the child pass before her like a luminous shadow. She stopped, failed to recognize the child, looking attentively at the form for half a minute. A moment later they came to tell her that the child had been run over and killed by a passing carriage. Although there was no recognition, the case is interesting by the precision of the details (Tel. Halluc, 268).

Dr. Woolcote, doctor on board the ship Plantagenet, going from India to England, saw his dying mother in a dream, and by her side, a cousin, a surgeon in the Royal Artillery, whom he thought to be in China. The dream was so distinct that he went to wake one of his friends. On reaching the docks, he saw his father who was not in mourning, and thought, "All is well, my dream deceived me." Nevertheless the dream was true, his mother was dead and his cousin had been present. The coincidence of time is somewhat uncertain (Tel. Halluc, 108).

Mrs. Wickham, at Malta, was anxious about the health of a friend at Brighton. She went out to dine, but was still disquieted. As she was undoing her hair that evening she felt the pressure of a hand on her head and neck; and shortly after cold lips were pressed to her cheek and she heard her friend's voice saying, "Good-bye, good-bye." Nevertheless she went to sleep, and saw her friend enter. He was very pale, kissed her, and disappeared.

She noted down the dream. Some days later she had news of his death on the day and at the hour of her first monition, 10 a.m. on March 13th.

Captain Calt, suddenly waking up, saw his brother, then an officer in the Crimea (1854) looking at him affectionately. He walked through the apparition, which then appeared behind him with blood on the temple. Much disturbed, he went to a friend's room. Next day his father forbade him to speak of the apparition. It took place a few hours after the death of Oliver Calt who had been struck by a bullet in the temple in the assault on the Redan (A. S. P., 1891, i, 166).

Mr. Bard, living at Hingston, passed by the cemetery on his way home and saw there Mme. Freville who lived in the same town, a rather eccentric person who interested herself in the graves. She seemed dressed as usual, but her face was very white. She looked fixedly at Mr. Bard, and soon disappeared mysteriously. Mr. Bard ascertained that there was no open grave into which she might have fallen. In point of fact, this lady, of whose illness Mr. Bard knew nothing, was dying at that moment. The vision was so clear that Mr. Bard was certain of the identity (A. S. P.f 1891, i, 171).

Mr. Jones, an English officer in Burma, while chatting with his friends, suddenly saw a coffin and in it one of his sisters. He stopped in the middle of his talk, and being very sceptical on such matters, laughed at what he had seen. His sister had died in England on that day (A. 5. P., 1891, i, 173).

Signor Sebastian Fenzi, at the sea-side (Fortoula) about sixty miles from Florence, under great disturbance of mind, saw his brother, Senator Carlo Fenzi, whom he recognized by his large white moustaches, walking quietly from rock to rock in spite of the torrential rain and storm. He waved his hand and shouted to the apparition, but it disappeared among the rocks. At this moment a young cousin, black-bearded and quite different in appearance from Carlo Fenzi, emerged from the woods, not having passed by way of the rocks. On returning home Signor Fenzi learned that his brother was dying. He left for Florence at once, but his brother had already expired. Some months before his death, Carlo Fenzi had said to his brother Sebastian, "Whichever of us dies first will come to warn the other, but I am sure that I shall die before you; in three months I shall be no more.,,

This conversation took place in June, and Carlo Fenzi died September 2, 1881 (A. S. P., 1891, i, 174).

On December 28, 1906, at 11 p.m., Mme. X. saw at her bedside the form of a woman whose features and dress she could clearly distinguish. The apparition spoke in a muffled voice, saying, "I am Helen Ram, I will come for you; we shall be together in the other world." Helen Ram died at Hyeres, on December 28th, at 4 a.m. There was therefore a difference of twenty hours between the time of death and the time of the apparition. The details of the dress were correct. Mme. Ram had not been ailing, and Mme. X. did not know her well (A. S. P., 1907, xvii, 607).

General X., very highly placed in the French Army, wrote to M. de Rochas: "In 1832 I was five years old, and was sent to my maternal grandmother, where I slept with a cousin of my own age. We were prattling in bed, and when the light was put out I saw the figure of my grandmother on the father's side at the foot of my bed. I had just left her and she was very fond of me. She died at the very hour she appeared to me" (A. S. P., 1891, i, 260).

Mr. S. saw, in the daytime, in a corridor of his house, a kind of mist which thickened and gradually took the form of a man whose head and shoulders became more and more distinct. The rest of the body seemed wrapped in a sort of gauze, like a mantle covering the feet. The apparition was grey. The head turned towards him with a gentle, peaceful expression and disappeared like a jet of steam condensing. S. then remembered a friend whom he had not seen for some weeks and had not thought of that day. This friend had died suddenly at the same hour (Tel. Halluc, 182).

M. A. Z., after a friendly chat on trivial matters with his young friend, B., went home and began to read. He heard the outside door noisily opened, followed by hurried steps clearly heard along the road. Mr. Z. felt that there was something near him outside the glass of the window. He heard short panting breaths like someone getting breath before speaking. Then suddenly, like a gunshot, a loud cry, followed by a moaning, and sobs of great pain. His wife heard nothing, but, seeing her husband's alarm, said, "What is the matter?" M. Z. replied, "There is someone outside, but it is so strange and horrible that I dare not go out." At that very moment, but too far away for any sound to reach the house, B. had poisoned himself with prussic acid and had fallen with a loud cry (Tel. Hallnc, 302).

Mrs. Meneer, wife of the principal of Torre School (Torquay), dreamt one night that she saw her father's head in a coffin at the foot of the bed. Her father, Mr. Wellington, was in the Indian Army, and had been taken prisoner by the Chinese, and had been beheaded, his head being carried in triumph to their camp (Human Personality, i, 424).

The following case, though not strictly a monition of death, is so similar that it should be placed among these:

Dr. Bruce, of Micanopy (U. S. A.) on the night of December 27, 1883, dreamt that he saw a brawl in which a man was seriously hurt, his throat being cut. He did not recognize the man, whose hands were before his face, but Dr. Bruce saw his own wife by the side of the wounded man, saying she would not leave him till he were helped. That same night his brother-in-law had been wounded in the course of a quarrel by a dagger-stroke through his neck. It seems that on the same night, another sister of the wounded man had dreamt of a man whose throat was cut, without, however, recognizing him (Myers, Human Personality,

i, 413).

