The wife of a major in the artillery at Colaba, two miles from Bombay, magnetized a Creole girl — Ruth — who sazv in a glass of water, and gave many proofs of lucidity. Before a great polo tournament Ruth described one of the officers who would take part in it, and finally named Captain X., saying that he would be bitten on the leg by a horse; which came to pass. Another time, before the judge of a neighbouring district, Ruth described his room, the coffer that was in it, and said that certain papers had been stolen by a person whom she described, whom the judge recognized, and who was afterwards convicted.

Dr. Ferroul, the mayor of Narbonne and deputy for the Aube, made some noteworthy experiments on the lucidity of Anna B., a young woman whom he put into the somnambulic state. An amusing incident is related by him. Being editor of the Republique Sociale, a socialist paper of Narbonne, and having a crow to pluck with the prefect of the Aude, he obtained through Anna some confidential details which he published in his paper. The prefect, supposing the revelations to have been made by two agents of the secret police, dismissed them. They were proved innocent. It was solely by the lucidity of Anna that the knowledge of the facts had come to Dr. Ferroul.

Some further interesting experiments were made with Anna, which at first seemed to establish the fact of her vision through opaque paper. A line was written, "Your party is certainly killing itself by subservience.,, This was folded, put into an outer green envelope, enclosing another envelope, and the whole wrapped in two pieces of squared paper. The writing was read by Anna. Grasset, the eminent professor of the Medical Faculty of Montpellier, subsequently gave Dr. Ferroul another opaque envelope containing two verses that were immediately read by Anna {A. S. P., 1896, vi, 145).

This experiment, which appeared decisive to Grasset, was followed by a failure. A commission was named, and no result secured. It is well known that for various reasons scientific commissions rarely reach a definite conclusion, but nevertheless there is reason to doubt the experiments of Dr. Ferroul with Anna.

Covers may be still more opaque without intercepting vision. My learned friend, Abelous, professor of physiology in the Faculty of Montpellier, placed a white envelope sealed with a red seal and two unexposed photographic plates in a box of thick wood. By the pressure of the seal the wax had extended into blisters round the impression. A young sensitive, hypnotized by Dr. Marques, saw "something round, red, which seems to have rays round it." In another box Abelous had placed a casket containing a medal of Professor Grasset. The seer said, "It is a medal representing a man with a beard and tangled hair." This was characteristic of Grasset's appearance. This is more probably due to a new and unknown faculty than to hyperacuity of retinal vision.1

The Rev. Mr. Lefroy, who disbelieved in lucidity, made an experiment with Miss X. at Zermatt. He wrote the word Heautontimoroumenos on a piece of paper that Miss X. could not see. She said, "It is a very long word, there are two m's, and it begins with an H." He then tried easier words; he wrote Ink, and Miss X. said, "Ink." He wrote Toy, and Miss X. said "Yot" (Phantasms of the Living, 1885, ii, 655).

Dr. Terrien, president of the Society of Medicine, at Nantes, went to visit a patient at Chauche, about five miles from the town where he lived. At Chauche he was detained by various cases, among them that of a child that had hurt its knee by a fall from a ladder. This was related to Mme. Terrien by a young sewing maid working with her, who had occasional fits of somnambulism.2

Mr. Adamson, who occupied a high position in the administration of South Australia, having lost a pencil-case that he greatly valued, asked a young girl presumed to be clairvoyant, who told him that it had been found on the high-road, and placed in a box. She described the house and the appearance of the finder. It was returned to the owner next clay; all the details related being found perfectly correct.

Dr. Osty has studied in full detail one of the best cases of cryptesthesia on record. For various reasons the names cannot be given; I therefore use pseudonyms, and change dates and places.

On the 23d of September, 1919, M. Nicholas Cordier, a municipal councillor, a well-to-do bachelor, and given to botanical research, went for a botanical excursion in the Vosges Mountains. He failed to return in the evening. His mother and the relations who lived with him became anxious, and during the

*Sur une observation de vision extrd-sensorielle, Melanges biologiques pour le jubitt de Ch. Richet, Paris, Mean, 1913, PP- »-S«

2Essai d 'interpretation d'un cas curieux de vision et d'audition a grande distance chez une hystSrique de quatorze ans durant Vitat de somnambulisme (A. S. P., July, 1914. *xiv, 198-203).

night of the 23d-24th they sought to discover where he had gone. He did not reappear on the following morning, and all they could learn was that two wayfarers had seen him at three o'clock in a precipitous and somewhat dangerous part of the mountains. An active search was set on foot; not only the police, but soldiers from a regiment near explored the district without result. The local papers and also those of Paris mentioned the disappearance of M. Cordier, and the family offered a reward of 5,000 francs for the discovery of the body. Assiduous and persistent search was made from the 23d of September to the 7th of October. On that day the brother of M. Cordier wrote to Dr. Osty, asking him to submit the case to some somnambulist. Dr. Osty knew only by telegram the conditions under which M. Cordier had disappeared. The clothes usually worn by M. Cordier were sent him, and of these he took only a stocking-suspender, and without giving the least indication of the person and his disappearance, placed it in the hands of Mme. M., she being in (magnetic) sleep. Mme. M. said at once that this person, whom she described fairly correctly, had been in the mountains, that he had in his hand some tufts of grass, that he had fallen into a ravine that she described, mentioning a lake and giving some other indications.

Further and more precise indications were given on the 8th, and on the 9th, thanks to the descriptions given by Mme. M. to Dr. Osty, and sent by him to M. Cordier's brother, the body of M. Nicholas Cordier was found. Other very precise details were given that I cannot mention here. It is sufficient to say that it is absolutely impossible that Mme. M. should have become aware by any normal means: (1) that M. Cordier was in question; (2) that he had been in the mountains, and (3) of the exact place in which he had fallen.

The reward of 5,000 francs was not considered due, since the actual finding of the body was by the family. I do not know if Mme. M., who would seem to have had some right to it, received the money.

M. Suhr quotes the case of a Mr. Balle, magnetized by Hansen, a barrister of Copenhagen, who travelled (in imagination) to find the mother of M. Suhr at Roeskilde. Balle saw her slightly indisposed in bed, in a street named Skromerstrade. M. Suhr considered this a double error, but it was proved that his mother, against all anticipation, was actually ill in the street designated.

Balle had never been to Roeskilde. Two other instances of clairvoyance were given by M. Balle (P. S. P. R., 1892, vii, 366).

A fine example of somnambulic cryptesthesia is reported to me by Mme. D., a lady of high character and great intelligence. For the first time in her life, she went with her daughter, Mme. R., to consult a somnambulist (who did not know her name), on a theft made from her. The somnambulist said to her: 'The person who entered your house used the name of a dead man; and what a man! — a true hero, extraordinarily brave, who did more than his duty; he sacrificed himself for another." This was perfectly correct, far beyond any chance: the son of Mme. D. had been mortally wounded at the Bois de Caillette in going, under a fierce bombardment, to the help of one of his wounded men. In 1919, on the anniversary of this deed, a certain person calling himself the friend of Marcel D., Mme. D.'s son, had introduced himself, and while waiting for the lady had robbed her of a picture, a Corot, which she valued highly. Curiously enough the thief had given his real name, and brought back the stolen picture on the following day.

During incidents of the "major spontaneous hypnotism" described by Charcot as showing the advent of an attack of hysteria, cryptesthesia and lucidity sometimes occur. The visions alleged in the lives of saints are mostly connected with their times of crisis or ecstasy whether the form these take is catalepsy, lethargy, or convulsions. The cases of demoniacs who speak in unknown tongues (?) and divine the thoughts of their interlocutors (?) would give us many instances; but the credulity of the witnesses deprives them of any scientific value.

In this connection a more recent observation is furnished by Dr. Fanton (A. S. P., December, 1910). While at Marseilles, he received a letter from Mr. X., announcing his return to Geneva, where he lived. At the same time Dr. Fanton was called in by Mme. X., living at Marseilles, for a violent hystero-cataleptic attack. As soon as he entered Mme. X. said, "You were eating an omelet, and you said 'Not at home!' " which was true. She added, "My husband has sent you a telegram saying he is coming, but he will not arrive, for he has gone to sleep in the train."

Mme. X., however, could not have known anything (normally) about the omelet, nor the telegram, nor the singular fact (a premonition) that Mr. X. would be asleep in the train at Culoz.

I have reported a remarkable instance of lucidity in my own experience that occurred long ago and impressed me very strongly at the time. While a young student at the Hotel-Dieu Hospital I was in the habit of magnetizing a convalescent girl who was still an inmate. One day I took with me an American fellowstudent who had never before been to the hospital, and I said to T., in her sleep, "Do you know my friend's name?" She began to laugh. Then I said, "Look, what is the first letter of his name?" She said, "There are five letters; the first is H, then E, I do not see the third, the fourth is R, and the fifth is N." My friend's name was Hearn (Phant. of the Living, 1886, ii, 665). I made experiments in sending some hypnotized subjects "travelling" as the old magnetizers did, and had some astonishing successes, especially with Alice.

She went to visit the house of a Mr. C. at Mans, a house not known to me, but very well known to Mr. P. Renouard, then present. She saw a walled garden and a swing (correct, but unknown to Mr. Renouard, for the swing had been placed there since he was last at Mans). She saw a clock with pillars which she described closely enough for me to make the rough sketch annexed, which may be compared with Fig. 3 of the actual clock in Mr. C.'s drawing-room.

On another day Alice described the house of Dr. P. Rondeau, then present. "Draperies over the mantelpiece, a clock, and, leaning on the wood, someone looking at the clock whose shoulder is visible. A large painting of a landscape; between the town and the sea something pointed, a tower, or the roof of a church... In fact, in M. Rondeau's country house which Alice could never have seen, there is a statue of Penelope whose shoulder is prominent, looking at the clock towards which her head is turned. The picture is a copy of one by Canaletti and represents Venice, the canal in the foreground, and behind it the church of San Giorgio Maggiore.

Some instances of lucidity came to me from Leonie B., though these were very few in the course of a large number of experiments.

One day Pierre Janet set her "travelling." In her hypnotic sleep she went to Paris to see me and M. Gibert who had left for Paris. On a sudden she said, "It is burning." P. Janet tried to calm her, she returned to sleep, but soon woke again, saying, "But, M. Janet, I assure you that it is burning."

In fact my laboratory in the Rue Vauquelin caught fire at six that morning, November 15th, and was burnt out.1

Fig. 2. — Rough sketch made from the description by Alice.

Leonie gave me one day a splendid example of lucidity, though it was accidental rather than experimental, and the details referred

Fig. 3. — The clock in Mr. C.'s house as sketched by P. Renouard.

xThere were two premonitions (or monitions, for the hour at which the dreams took place is not recorded). That night, between the i4th-i5th of November, two of my most intimate friends, M. Ferrari and J. Hericourt, both dreamed, independently of each other, of flames and fire.

to quite unimportant facts. Experimenting with her one evening, without success, with cards and numbers, I spoke to her of my friend J. P. Langlois and said, "What has happened to him?" She at once said somewhat disrespectfully, "He has burnt his paw. Why is he not more careful in pouring out?" "Pouring out what?" "A red liquor in a little bottle... his skin has blistered at once." Nothing could have been more correct. Two hours before, J. P. Langlois, who was my chief laboratory assistant, in preparing some hypobromide of soda had poured out the bromine (the red liquor), too fast and some had gone on his hand and arm, making an extensive blister. Leonie could not have gone to the laboratory and no one had come from it to my house. I was then alone in Paris and had said nothing to any one about the accident that had happened two hours previously.

Dr. Backmann, of Kalmar, Sweden, observed a young girl, Alma L., who gave him many instances of lucidity in hypnotic sleep. One seems to indicate something more than lucidity. She was asked to go to the director-general of the pilot service at Stockholm, where she had never been. She saw the director sitting at his table, and described the room exactly. The order was then given her to take the bunch of keys that she had seen on the table and to place her hand on his shoulder to draw his attention. Alma declared that the director noticed her. Afterwards, the director, who had not the least suspicion that any experiment was being tried upon him, said that he was conscious of a strange feeling on the day and hour in question. He was busy at his table, when, without any kind of reason, his eyes fell on the bunch of keys near him on the table, which he was not accustomed to put there. He thought he saw a woman's form. Thinking it to be the housemaid, he took no notice. But, on the fact being repeated, he called (to her) and got up to see what was the matter. Neither the servant nor any other had been in his room. He heard no noise nor perceived any movement of the keys (A. S. P., 1892, ii, 68).

A man having been arrested for murder, one of Dr. Backmann's subjects, Agda Olsen, described very exactly the house where the crime had been committed, and though she had never seen the murderer, said that he had a cicatrice on his right hand. The constable of Kalmar, Ljung, who had examined the accused, had not observed the cicatrice, and only after Dr. Backmann had told him did he verify the fact, resulting from an old abscess.

Alma having given notable proofs of lucidity I resolved to go to Kalmar with F. and A. Myers to make some experiments with her. The following is F. Myers' account; his acuteness and insight are well known (Notes on a visit to Kalmar, A. S. P., 1892, ii, 160):

"M. Richet gave me a letter that he had just received of which I knew nothing, and went out of the room where Alma (hypnotized) was interrogated by Dr. Backmann. Alma said, The writer of this letter expresses a desire. It concerns something in metal; the thing can open and shut. There is some question of time and opportunity. It is some scientific matter that will be proved/ This was a letter from M. Tatin with whom I was then (April, 1891) experimenting on aeroplanes. The letter said, 'We tried the little machine, it kept turning to the same side. We had a satisfactory trial; the blades worked perfectly/ "

It goes without saying that I had never spoken of my attempts in aviation which (in 1871) I kept very secret.

Alma's answer is only a partial success, but it would be difficult to see in it mere coincidence. Alma, however, by reason of our presence was emotionally excited; when alone with Dr. Backmann she was perhaps more lucid. She once read the first letter of a word written by Dr. Kjelmann in the next room; another time, the word written being "Land," she said, "The first letter is M, the second A, the third R or N, and the word suggests the idea of springtime." This counts for very little, but in studying the fine examples of cryptesthesia by Mrs. Piper, it will be obvious that lucidity can carry much farther.

The proofs of lucidity given by reproduction or description of drawings enclosed in opaque envelopes are of profound interest; they have often led to remarkable results. But in such experiments more perhaps than in any others it is necessary to guard against two possible causes of error:

A. Unconscious assistance given to the lucid subject.

B. The possibility of chance coincidence.

A. When the hidden drawing is known, no sign whatever of approval or impatience must be given. This is very difficult. When the subject feels about, questions, and hesitates painfully for an hour, for two hours, or sometimes longer, one is tempted out of sheer pity to give some help in order that the experiment may succeed. It is, however, necessary to maintain rigid silence and impassiveness. It is difficult to be absolutely mute and immobile. A disapproving silence may be maintained when the subject is off the track, or he may be encouraged to go on when he is not. I speak from long experience in saying that much care is needed to reach the glacial impassiveness that is required; thinking that those less habituated to experiment than myself may not all of them and always be able to maintain the impartial silence that is so necessary.

The best way to obtain unexceptionable results in experiments on lucidity is that the contents of the envelope should be unknown. Mental transmission is thus excluded and non-telepathic cryptesthesia is then the only explanation of a successful experiment. But as I have already said, mental transmission is only a particular case of lucidity and if success is more frequent with it than without it, that will often be because, knowing the answer to be given, the experimenter works less strictly.

B. Even when there is perfect agreement between the original and the reproduction the element of chance coincidence is not to be neglected.

For instance: I tried about 180 drawings on different persons with whom I was experimenting, and had in all about 20 successes, some of which were very striking.1 Then, following out a series of mathematical combinations, I carried out 5,408 trials, in which chance alone was responsible for the association of any two drawings. The number of successes was 192, among which 10 were remarkable for identity between original and reproduction. Chance would give 3.5 successes per cent.; lucidity gave 12 per cent. The difference is noteworthy, but smaller than it would have appeared a priori.

It should also be observed that the calculus of probabilities is difficult to apply to the more or less exact reproduction of a drawing, for the criteria to be used must be decidedly arbitrary, whereas with cards or numbers, probabilities are easily estimated. I cannot, of course, reproduce here all the drawings, though that is almost necessary to a just appreciation of how difficult it is to estimate the element of chance in successes.

Alice, who is not a professional medium and has never been

lI do not give here the details of these, which will be found in the article published in the P. S. P. R., 1888, xii, 18-168. Relation de diver ses experiences sur la transmission tnentale, la lucidite, et autres phenomenes non explicables par les donnees scientifiques actuelles.

hypnotized except by myself, has given me very good examples of lucidity.

One day at the house of M. Hericourt, having made the sketch of a photograph frame chosen by him (shown in Fig. 4), to be submitted to Alice by me she said: "It is a locket (medaillon), an oval in a frame, the head of a man. He has braid on his chest, it is high-necked; it can be closed. There are six or seven lines of braid. He is not bareheaded, but wears a military cap which has three stripes. There are four stripes on the lower part of the sleeve, round it. It is the picture of some one who is thin, perhaps seated. I recognize him, but I cannot say who he is."

□ — □

Fig. 4-

Representing the sketch of the frame containing the second (Fig. 5). Fig. 4 was placed in a thick sealed envelope. Alice saw Fig. 5, though this was not in the envelope, but was in the frame itself at M. Hericourt's house. There were therefore two distinct phases in the cryptesthesia.

The description accords with the photograph of which only the frame had been sketched and placed in the sealed envelope submitted to Alice. This photograph which Hericourt had under his eyes when sketching the frame is of himself in uniform. Alice had never seen him in this attire, and did not know he had been an officer. If an inference can be drawn it would favour

Fig. 5.

telepathy rather than lucidity. Alice seeing the former, thought in Hericourt's mind, but not the sketch in the envelope.

My eminent friend, Th. Ribot, editor of the Revue Philosopliiquc, was present at another experiment with Alice. He brought a photograph in a thick envelope. I told Alice that it

Fig. 6. Fig. 7-

Sketch by Ferrari (Fig. 6) and reproduction by Alice (Fig. 7)-

rest. To get to the house one has to go upwards and turn round to the left." The photograph (of Toledo) agrees closely with the description.

The sketch above (Fig. 6) was given me by H. Ferrari who was not present. I did not know what was in the envelope, which was taken at random from among twenty others. The experiment is faultless and the reproduction very good (Fig. 7). Comment is needless, except that the conditions being unexceptionable the result must be due to cryptesthesia or to chance.

M. Hanriot handed me a lightly made sketch on triple folded paper in a closed envelope. I was absolutely ignorant of the nature of the drawing. Alice gave a confused description, but her words aroused the idea of a serpent. She said, "Interlaced curves along a stem, like an anchor." I then thought of the imprint on the books published by d'A. A. Renouard, my greatgrandfather, and drew it. Hanriot's sketch was of a serpent.

Fig. 8.

Drawing (a bunch of grapes) placed in an opaque envelope, the contents of

which I am ignorant of. Drawing made by Alice. She made five drawings in succession (which I do not give here, brevitatis causa), each approaching nearer the final result.

On January 24, 1888, I gave Alice three sketches unseen by myself:

(A) A sword; she drew two fencing foils, together.

(B) A drum; she said, "A hat."

(C) A hat; she did not reply.

Fig. 8 was presented to Alice in a thick envelope (contents unknown to me). She made five attempts, getting a little nearer each time, the last being Fig. 9.

Eugenie, a professional somnambulist who sometimes gave good instances of lucidity, said of another drawing, "It is a horse's head, the small head of a sheep or an ox.n The original was the head of a gazelle in outline.1

Further details would take up more space than this aspect of metapsychic phenomena warrants.

These experiments with Eugenie and Alice are of special interest, for in them there is no question of telepathy or mental transmission; it is a matter of cryptesthesia. Even if one could imagine that the luminous rays could filter through opaque bodies,

Fig. 9.

Last drawing given by Alice for the bunch of grapes.

such retinal hyperesthesia would be a modality of cryptesthesia. I will close this part of the subject with six examples:

Sketch in closed envelope.

A table. An anchor. A bottle. Knave of hearts. A sword. A hat and drum.

Description.

An oval and a stick (Eugenie). A sword with cross handle (Eugenie). A bird with head and neck (Eugenie). A Maltese cross (Alice). Foils (Alice). A hat (Alice).

^Experiments in Thought Transference, P. S. P. R., 1888, xii, 169-216.

Messrs. Schmoll and Mabire made one hundred and twentyone trials with drawings, apparently under less exacting conditions, since the guesser was surrounded by persons who all knew the design to be reproduced by mental vision. Moreover, the sketch was not in a closed envelope, the paper being open, though the back of the subject was turned to it and the eyes closed. The results were occasionally very good; there were six very striking successes in the one hundred and twenty-one trials. This is beyond the limits of chance, though not very greatly.



(b) Conclusions

A close study of these instances of cryptesthesia, of which I could quote many more, no doubt will discover some that are not very conclusive. Some may be due to chance, and others to defective experiment; but there are so many that have been so carefully observed and with such scrupulous exactitude that doubt is impossible.

Looking at the whole evidence, no one can imagine a great error lasting through a whole century, accepted by distinguished scientific men, admitted by sceptics, and passing a multitude of tests. Chances of 1: 1000 or 1: 10,000 do not continually recur in experimental work; and we are working against far more remote probabilities. The event against which there are real odds of 1: 1000 does not come to pass.

It has not been sufficiently considered that in daily life improbable events rarely happen. We evolve in a connected series of small and very likely events. The visits I receive, the letters I write, the persons I meet, and the news given to me are very rarely improbable. Probable and likely events rule our lives. It is a simple truism to say so, nevertheless it must be said.

An inference must be drawn from this — we do not foresee the unlikely. Therefore when some unlikely event is indicated by monitory or premonitory cryptesthesia there must be a cause for it, and this cause is some unknown vibration received subconsciously.

To take a concrete instance among hundreds, Mr. Fraser Harris sees mentally his wife talking to a beggar who is holding a broom. This is an unlikely event of which he would not have thought unless something had conveyed this image to his brain. It is absurd to refer it to chance. The case is analogous to a cord stretched across a road. If a bicyclist falls at that place no one would say that the fall was due to chance; it would, of course, be ascribed to the cord. There are no uncaused effects. When an unlikely event is foretold and duly comes to pass, that can only be due to cryptesthesia, for in the course of our lives, with but few exceptions, we do not foresee the improbable, and the improbable does not happen.

If I make an experiment on the atomic weight of silver and get 108.4 I do not attribute the result to chance. Why should I do so when, on asking Stella for the name of Mr. N.'s son, she answers, "Jean"?

Certainly it might be preferable to operate with cards and numbers only instead of drawings, travels, names, and sundry events, inasmuch as the former allow of exact calculation of probabilities; but we must take account of the fact that somnambulists do not readily lend themselves to this kind of experiment. M. Osty says that to do this is to require from lucidity what it cannot give.

When I try to get correct guesses of cards or numbers from Leonie I get only lamentable failures, perhaps because her will masks the indications of her cryptesthesia; whilst a fire in my laboratory or the accident to M. Langlois causes her to relate the fact very accurately (though I did not ask for either), with a precision whose probability is extremely small and cannot be expressed in figures.

The facts of lucidity are usually as unpredictable as the fall of an aerolite. With few exceptions one cannot count on success in a given experiment any more than one can foresee the fall of a meteor. Actual facts inaccessible to our normal senses are indicated, but unfortunately they are often not exact answers to exact questions. Somnambules and mediums do not give precise answers, though they state kindred facts that they could not have known by their normal senses.

It may be regrettable that one cannot use a hypnotized subject whose moral sensitiveness is very acute, like a calculating machine. To set them "travelling" interests them much more than the perception of an eight of spades. They are more interested in seeing a burning house, or a boat coming in, than in counting the number of black dots on a card. It may be unfortunate, but one must accept the conditions. The experiments are decisive; and taken by themselves are sufficient to establish that higher and mysterious faculty of cognition that I have called cryptesthesia. Experiments with mediums confirm this much more strongly.



4. Cryptesthesia Under Spiritist Conditions



(a) Summary of the Facts

I call the form of experimental cryptesthesia manifested in spiritist circles, "spiritist cryptesthesia."

Spiritualism is a theory according to which the dead have not lost consciousness; the mind continues to exist as a spirit, and these spirits can enter into communication with mortals through mediums. As a definition, it may be said that the spiritist state is a psychological state such that the person experimented with, called a medium, and retaining (or not retaining) consciousness of his normal personality, makes movements (speech, writing, movements, or noises in a table, or motion of a planchette) which are not acts of his will. He claims that a personality other than himself acts on him and influences him.

This definition must not be taken to imply anything as to the reality of this extraneous personality. This will be examined later on in full detail. In the present chapter we shall only indicate its results from the point of view of cryptesthesia, without discussing their mechanism.

In other words, we shall seek to discover whether, in experiments to that end, mediums are able by any procedure to reveal or indicate facts that normal human intelligence could not be acquainted with; that is, cryptesthesia.

It is a minor matter whether the fact of supernormal cognition is manifested by raps, automatically written messages, by direct writing, by voices heard, or by words spoken, provided that the bare fact itself be duly proved. Now this fact has been established by so many unquestionable proofs that it is surprising that it should have been disputed or denied. Indeed, those who deny it are those who have neither experimented, nor read, nor studied, nor thought. Cryptesthesia which has been shown to be probable, by experiments on normal persons, and extremely probable, by experiments on hypnotized persons, becomes dazzlingly evident when it is studied under its spiritist modalities.

Richard Hodgson, summing up his experiences with Mrs. Piper, says that he brought at least fifty persons that he knew to be strangers to her and took every possible precaution to prevent her obtaining any particulars about them. In most cases facts were alleged that could not have been known to Mrs. Piper; and he even employed detectives to make sure.1

In studying the accounts of her innumerable seances, we find that over two hundred names have been given correctly; they cannot, obviously, be given even in summary. Unless we imagine the monstrous absurdity of bad faith or imbecility on the part of Mr. Hodgson and Professor Hyslop, the cryptesthesia of Mrs. Piper must be considered to have been demonstrated two hundred times.

A whole volume would be required to sum up Hodgson's accounts, and after reading them it is impossible to doubt the fact of cryptesthesia, and even if this is generally of the telepathic type (for the answers to the questions put were known to the questioner), this is not always the case, as for instance when Mr. Thaw took her some hair in a paper and Mrs. Piper stated it to be a religious object; which was true, Mr. Thaw having made a mistake in the thing chosen.

If Florence Cook, D. D. Home, and Eusapia are the most remarkable mediums for objective phenomena, Mrs. Piper is certainly first among all those who have shown subjective ones. R. Hodgson, William James, J. Hyslop, P. Bourget, F. Myers, Mrs. Verrall, and Sir Oliver Lodge, after many seances, formally testified to her telepathic powers.

Myers says: "Facts personal to myself and accessible by printed records, collusion, or enquiry (though I do not think any of these methods were used), were not stated more frequently than others; messages were given me as coming from a friend many years deceased, and certain circumstances were indicated that Mrs. Piper could not have known. I know some facts that were suppressed as being of too intimate a nature, and the statement of one or two such facts is more convincing of supernormal cognition than giving dozens of names that the consultant could have no motive to suppress. All observers will agree that many of the facts stated could not have been dis-

*My personal evidence does not count among such very numerous testimonies, but I may be permitted to say that in the only experiment that I made with Mrs. Piper, whom I saw but once, she named a little dog "Dick" that I had in my childhood; a name that could not have reached her by normal channels. She made several errors before hitting on the name.

covered even by a practiced detective and others could have become known only by great outlay of time and money."

"I am as absolutely certain," says William James, "as I am of any personal fact, that Mrs. Piper knows in trance things she could not have known in her waking state."

Sir Oliver Lodge says: "In introducing anonymous strangers and questioning her myself in various ways, I am certain that many particulars that she gives in trance are not acquired by ordinary means. She can diagnose disease, and describe the present or former possessors of small objects under conditions that exclude the use of the normal senses."

The following instances are given by Sir Oliver:

Professor Gonner was introduced by him under an assumed name; she spoke of his Uncle William as having died through a wound in the head. This uncle had been killed in an electoral riot by a stone striking him on the head, before Professor Gonner was born.

"My wife's father," says Lodge, "died in a dramatic and affecting manner when she was fifteen clays old. Phinuit gave a thrilling account of the circumstances of this death. The statement of the death of her father-in-law by a fall into the hold of his ship was also correct."

A Liverpool doctor slightly known to Sir Oliver and Lady Lodge was presented under the name of Dr. Jones. Mrs. Piper spoke to him of one of his daughters, whom she named as Daisy, as being pretty but ailing; and added, "There is a woman named Kate by her, whom you call Kitty." Daisy is pretty, but deaf, and the children's nurse is named Kate.

A stenographer brought to the seance to take down Mrs. Piper's words was called apart by Phinuit and told that he had a cousin called Charley; he added, "There are six children in your family, four boys and two girls; you have a sister Minnie; and you are called Ed." All which was correct.

Mrs. Piper recalls events long past, referring to the parents and grandparents of her questioners, events often needing long enquiries for their verification. One of the brothers of Lodge's father had a twin brother whose name was given by Mrs. Piper as Jerry (Jeremiah); she also named the other twin, Robert; she said that he was blind (correct), and that when a child he had a serpent's skin in his possession, a fact that happened sixtysix years before, and of which Sir Oliver was ignorant, but which he found to be true. She spoke also of Jerry having swum a creek; this also was true.

In one of the earlier seances Mrs. Piper had sat down on a certain sofa. Phinuit, touching this sofa, said that it had been a gift from Aunt Annie, who had a son, Charley. Annie, speaking by Phinuit, said, "I am sorry that Charley should have eaten that bird; it made him ill." All the above was correct, and at that very time Charley, being in Canada, had shot a water-hen, had eaten it, and been ill some days after.

The first communications of George Pelham through Mrs. Piper are important, alike as evidence of cryptesthesia and for the possibility of identifying him. I will summarize them.

In the presence of R. Hodgson, Mr. Hart, a friend of George Pelham, deceased, received circumstantial details on the acts and words of G. P. George Pelham (a pseudonym for Robinson) told Hart, by the voice of Mrs. Piper, that Hart's sleeve-links had belonged to G. P. He gave the names of Mr. and Mrs. Howard, friends of G. P., and the name of their daughter Kalerine, and added, "Tell her, so that she may recognize me, that I will solve the Kalerine problems." Mr. Hart, not understanding these words, went to the Howard family (which Mrs. Piper did not know), and from them he learned that on the last occasion that G. P. saw Kalerine, a young girl of fifteen, he had spoken to her of God, eternity, time, and space; and said that one day he would tell her more.

After this seance the Howards had other meetings with Mrs. Piper. "The matters treated of," says Hodgson, "were characteristic, highly intimate, and personal. Mutual friends were named. The Howards, who took no interest in psychical research, became convinced that they had really spoken with the personality of the friend they had known for so many years."

After Hodgson's death another able and conscientious American psychologist, James Hyslop, the general secretary of the American Society for Psychical Research, who died in June, 1920, studied Mrs. Piper. Her "guide" was then Hodgson himself, and the evidences of cryptesthesia were startling.

Hyslop, having asked her concerning his own father, received from Mrs. Piper many correct particulars. She stated where he had left his spectacles when he died; she spoke of his books, of a cap knitted for him, and of a pocket-knife with a brown handle with which he used to pare his nails. She mentioned divers walking-sticks that he had possessed, naming one with a ring, another with a gilt scarab, and one with a bent handle that had been broken; details of which all were correct and of which Hyslop had no knowledge, not consciously at any rate.

Mrs. X. introduced herself as Margaret Brown, and brought with her three locks of hair, x, b, and s, knowing only the origin of s. Of the lock x Mrs. Piper said, "It is from Fred... Imogen? Who is Imogen?" This lock was in fact from Imogen Garnay, which Mr. Fred Day had cut to give to Margaret Brown. Of the lock b Mrs. Piper said, "This belongs to some one who is very ill." In fact the owner of the lock died within the year. Of the lock j she said, "She is niggardly of her hair; she is your mother, she has four children, two boys and two girls." This was correct, and Margaret had cut off the lock of hair by a trick (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1906, xvi, 546).

Hodgson, in a seance with Mrs. Piper, received a message from Eliza who claimed to have helped Mr. F. at his death. Mr. F. had died the day before, and his death had been announced in the Boston papers. Two or three days later Hodgson learned that at the time of his death, Mr. F. had said that he saw Eliza who was calling him. Mrs. Piper did not know Eliza (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 107).

A curious fact is the admixture of personalities. It would seem (though this is doubtless a symbolization), that when any person — Phinuit, Hyslop senior, or George Pelham — cannot give certain particulars, he appeals to some person better informed. Professor Newbold gives a Greek phrase. Mrs. Piper knows no Greek, but George Pelham says, "I will ask Stainton Moses, who is a Hellenist," and shortly after the translation is given. Another time Rector and Hodgson, speaking by Mrs. Piper, cannot give the name of Robert Hyslop's mother-in-law. They "leave the machine," according to Mrs. Piper's picturesque phrase; that is, there is a short silence, then George Pelham returns and says, "She was called Margaret." But it is difficult to believe in the reality of these personifications in the spirit world who seek each other out and give information.

The curious case of Hannah Wild, analyzed by Mr. Sage, is a good example of telepathy coincident with complete absenc of knowledge of facts known only to the deceased person. Mrs. Blodgett interrogates Mrs. Piper and gets an answer from her sister (Hannah Wild), two years deceased. Now Hannah Wild had written a letter in which were some words that no one could understand. Mrs. Piper could say nothing about this letter, though the thoughts and secret acts of Mrs. Blodgett were correctly stated; so that this experiment, so unsatisfactory as to personal survival, was excellent for telepathy and cryptesthesia.1

Mrs. Verrall, an acute observer, obtained some good results. Mrs. Piper said to her, "Your grandfather was paralyzed; he had a sister called Suzanne, and a son, Henry. This uncle married a relation, a lady named Keley." Mrs. Verrall, who was not familiar with that branch of her family, made careful enquiries and found the facts to be as stated (Hyslop, Science and a Future Life, Boston, 1905, 157).

Paul Bourget, enquiring of Mrs. Piper (in the character of Phinuit), showed her a small travelling clock. Mrs. Piper was able to say to whom the clock had belonged, his way of life, and the mode of his death (suicide by poison). "She described with remarkable accuracy the flat I occupied in Paris, mentioning the storey and an inner staircase. She saw on the wall an object that she described, and on the mantelpiece a portrait that she thought to be that of a young man; it is of a girl whose hair has been cut short" (A. S. P., 1895, v, 72).

Mr. Hyslop, speaking to his father through Mrs. Piper, asked for news of Mr. H. C. The reply was that "H. C. is preoccupied about the church and its organ." Hyslop was unaware that H. C. had ceased to attend the church because an organ had been placed therein, of which he disapproved (Hyslop, loc. cit., 222).

Mr. Vernon Briggs, who had been in Honolulu, enquiring of Mrs. Piper concerning a little native boy, Kalua, that he had brought to America, received from her two words in the native language — lei (a garland of flowers), and aloka (salutations). When Mr. Briggs asked which island Kalua lived on she said Tawai, but her hand wrote Kawa'i. Now the name is correctly written as Kawai, but is pronounced Tawai by the natives.

For Mrs. M., a widow, Mrs. Piper wrote the names Brown and Parker, these being the names of the doctor and nurse who attended Mr. M. in his last illness. "I was then addressed," says

xIf the original text contained in the bulky volumes of the S. P. R. and the Am. S. P. R. in which Hodgson and Hyslop have recorded their studies of Mrs. Piper are not available, sufficient information can be obtained from M. Sage's book, Madame Piper, fourth edition, Paris, Leymarie, 1902. It is very readable.

Mrs. M., "as only my husband could have addressed me, mentioning matters that concerned him and that I alone knew. An intimate friend of his was also named. He alluded to our last walk in the park at T., and answered the question I put to him when he was dying, and too feeble to speak. This answer was made in a way that Mr. Hodgson or any stranger would not have understood, but it was quite clear to me" (Science and a Future. Life, 1905, 179).

Mrs. William James and her brother were told by Phinuit at a seance with Mrs. Piper, that their Aunt Kate had died at two or two-thirty a.m. that morning, and that they would receive a letter or telegram to that effect. During the morning a telegram arrived to say that Kate had died a few minutes after midnight.

I could multiply such instances related by skilful observers with minute care. The fact of cryptesthesia is undeniable. Mrs. Piper's gift is amply sufficient to prove the existence of this mysterious power of the mind. We can now go forward, and from hundreds of examples given by other mediums, select some in corroboration.

Those who wish to make a detailed study of these highly instructive phenomena are referred to the Proceedings of the American and the English Societies for Psychical Research, but a good notion of them can be obtained from the works of Myers, Lodge, and Hyslop.

Hyslop divides the lucidity of Mrs. Piper into three stages: (1) First report of Hodgson; (2) second report of Hodgson; (3) report of Hyslop. Already, after Hodgson's first report, when George Pelham had not yet appeared but only Phinuit, Hodgson said, "The very complex and suggestive results establish that names and incidents unknown to those present are indicated. This excludes telepathy as the sole cause of these phenomena." After the second report most of those who assisted at these seances had acquired "indubitable evidence" of supernormal action. Hyslop and Lodge appear to have come to the same conclusion.

It is true that some scientists who had only a few seances — Weir Mitchell, James Mark Baldwin, Professor Trowbridge, and Professor Eliot Norton — were not convinced. I shall venture to remind them that in so difficult a matter no conclusion can be drawn, one way or the other, unless after a long series of experiments. They did not continue their studies of Mrs. Piper, which was a mistake on their part.

Hyslop, replying to Podmore, made a minute calculation of probabilities as applied to Mrs. Piper's cryptesthesia.1 He was easily able to show that the probability of success due to chance alone is exceedingly small, denoted by some such number as (tV)47- Now it has already been stated more than once that the calculus of probabilities, correctly used, is an admirable check provided that the experiments are well performed; and the experiments by Hyslop seem to have been unexceptionable.

To supply data for the calculation Hyslop conceived the ingenious idea of asking a large number of persons the same questions that he put to Mrs. Piper, comparing these answers of non-sensitives with those given by her. He selected one hundred and five questions which Mrs. Piper had answered correctly, and rightly concluding that the answers by non-sensitives were due to chance alone, he reached the enormous figure of a probability of (tV)147.

To give an example of his method, I quote question 46:

Has your father travelled in the West?

(a) Was he then in a railway accident?

(b) Was he injured by it?

(c) Was your mother-in-law with him?

(d) Did the accident take place on a bridge?

(e) Is it some time since the accident took place? (/) Was he ill in consequence of the accident?

Out of 420 persons, 105 answered the general question affirmatively, 10 had been in a railway accident, one of these only, on a bridge. None of the 420 answered "Yes" to all the questions, so that the probability is certainly less than 1: 420; but on the separate probability of each question, compounded for the whole, the figures come out as odds of 1 to 2,500,000,000; which amounts to moral certainty that chance could not have produced Mrs. Piper's results. The method that I employed with Stella is simpler, but leads to the same conclusion — the results cannot be explained by chance if the conditions of experiment are strict, as I believe both mine and Hyslop's to have been.

William James relates (Am. S. P. R., 1909, iii, 470) some experiments made with Mrs. Piper that seem to him to be

1Chance coincidence and guessing in a mediumistic experiment (Proc. Am. S. P. R.t August, 1919. xiii, 1-89)-

proofs not only of lucidity but of survival, these having to do with R. Hodgson deceased speaking through Mrs. Piper. He cites the following fact: "There is a person named Child, who has suddenly come, and sends his love to William (William James), and to his own wife who is living. He says L.. Such were the words of Mrs. Piper to Miss Robbins. Now neither Mrs. Piper nor Miss Robbins knew Child (deceased), who had been a most intimate friend of William James. Mrs. Child's Christian name begins with L. And William James concludes that the facts are "unquestionably supernormal. "

Even the most sceptical must be moved by the consensus of such men as Myers, Oliver Lodge, William James, R. Hodgson, and J. Hyslop, who have all, after enquiries lasting over twenty years, agreed in recognizing the lucidity of Mrs. Piper.

Although these experiments with Mrs. Piper demonstrate cryptesthesia quite conclusively they do not really demonstrate survival.

No doubt the personalities that present themselves — Hodgson, Hyslop (senior), Phinuit, George Pelham, Stainton Moses, and F. Myers — showed impressive traits of psychological individuality, and kept them distinctly in writing, voice, style, and thought. But can this be considered sufficient proof? The factitious personalities like the Marie Antoinette of Helen Smith show the same.

And another conclusion follows: Since survival is not established with so powerful a medium as Mrs. Piper, so superior to other mediums, still less can it be established by other mediums. But there is no need to be disturbed; each period has its own tasks. Ours today is to establish the real existence of a faculty of supernormal cognition — cryptesthesia; and Mrs. Piper is unquestionably the one among all others who has given the most numerous, striking, and decisive proofs of it.

Not only do the experiments with her prove the supernormal faculty, but they show that telepathy is not a satisfactory explanation. It is clairvoyance — lucidity — the knowledge of facts that no living person knows.

Although D. D. Home was chiefly known by his objective mediumship, he gave striking proofs of lucidity. At Hartford, to visitors whom he saw for the first time, he spoke of a little woman dressed in grey silk that he had half seen who seemed to be a phantom, since she disappeared. Home then heard a voice saying to him, "It displeases me that another coffin has been placed over mine. I will not allow this." He did not understand this enigmatic sentence, but next day when a visit was made to the tomb of the lady in grey the guardian of the cemetery, on putting the key into the lock of the vault, said, "Forgive me, but as there was a little space over the lady's coffin, we put that of the child of L. there; we had no time to notify you."

Miss Andrews, a non-professional, but very lucid, received in Home's presence a visit from Mr. Colley Grattam, a distinguished author and consul at Antwerp and Boston. He was disposed to laugh at spiritualism. "Do not laugh," said Miss Andrews, "you have a spirit who calls herself Emma, standing at your side." "What do you know of her?" said Mr. Colley Grattam, visibly disturbed. "She watches over you to protect you, for you were good to her. On a stormy night you took her in and gave her hot wine; you reproached her husband for his cowardly and inhuman conduct." "Yes," said Grattam, "the brute deserved to be hanged, though he was a member of Parliament. Adieu, I can hear no more, but I will never laugh at this again" (Home, Light and Darkness, 1883).

Mr. Britton, a well-known writer, relates an experience with Home at Greenfield: Unusually loud raps were made on the table for Mr. Britton, giving the message, "You are wanted at home; your child is very ill. Go at once, or you will be too late." "Then," said Mr. Britton, "I took my handbag and went. In the street I heard the whistle of the engine of the last train. Running as hard as I could, I just caught it, gripping the last carriage as it moved, and on arriving at home I found the facts as stated."

Hyslop made some experiments, interesting though less brilliant than those with Mrs. Piper, with Mrs. X., who is not a professional medium. He gave his name as Robert Brown. On seeing him Mrs. X. called him James H., saying that Robert was not his real name but that of his brother. She also gave "Mary" as the name of Hyslop's wife, then deceased (Hyslop, Science and a Future Life, Boston, 1905, 255).

Prince Wittgenstein learned through a medium's message that the will of his friend General v. Korff, some months dead, would be found in a particular cupboard of the house where he died. This will had been sought in vain, but on the arrival of Prince Wittgenstein's letter it had just been found where stated (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 120).

Mr. Hereward Carrington tells the following: The father of an English soldier, killed at Beaumont, after reading Sir Oliver Lodge's Raymond, decided to visit a medium — Mr. Vout Peters — to whom he did not give his name. Peters gave him at once four names — John, Elisabeth, William, and Edward. These were the names of his father, his mother, his brother, and a nephew long dead. He told him that his dead son was called Po.. r. The son's name was Roger, but the curious fact is that he was familiarly called called Poger and not Roger (Psychical Phenomena and the War, New York, 1919, 272).

Mrs. X. thought she had seen the phantom of her son one morning in full daylight; she went the same day to consult Mrs. Annie Brittain who said, "Your son tells me to say that if you saw him, it was himself and not a dream, and that Jeanne saw him too." This girl Jeanne, who did not know Mrs. Brittain, had also seen the apparition.

Captain James Burton, writing automatically to communicate with his deceased father, said, "I did not know that my mother, who lived about sixty miles away, had lost the dog that my father had given her. That same night I received a communication from him telling me of my mother's trouble. An intimate secret known only to him and to my mother concerning a matter that occurred some months before my birth was revealed to me, with the instruction, Tell this to your mother and she will know that it is I, your father, who is writing/ When I told her this she, who till then was sceptical, fainted" (The New Revelation, by Conan Doyle).

It is to be noted that Captain Burton's automatic writing is so small as to need a lens to read it.

De Vesme relates the following incident which acted on him so strongly as to decide him to devote himself to occult science. The narrator was Albert de N., who saw it at Rome.

One night, in 1871, his mother began to shriek aloud. Young Albert and his father hurried to her, and found her on the ground terror-stricken: she said that "spirits" had taken her out of her bed. The next morning at 7 o'clock there was a ring at the door. Colonel Baron Daviso, who was entirely unknown to Mr. and Mrs. de N., came to ask what had occurred, saying that at a spiritualist seance he had been told that the spirits would play a trick on a lady in that house, and he had come to ascertain the facts" (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 109).

An incident of spiritist cryptesthesia obtained by table-tipping was observed at Cambridge by Helen Verrall (7. S. P. R., March, 1907, 36). On the 29th of January, at 6 P.M., the following words were dictated: "Fellow of Royal Society Potter, dead this afternoon, 4:30, Editor of Physiological Review London 43 Belsize Gardens Kensington, married, five children. "

The message applied well enough to the eminent physiologist, Foster (not Potter) an F. R. S., married, the father of five children, who lived in London (the address is incorrect), who died in the night of the 28th, not at 4:30 on the 29th. The news only reached Cambridge late in the evening of the 29th by the London evening papers of that day; and Helen Verrall and Mr. Bayfield, who was at the table with her, had seen no one or looked at any paper. It is also to be noted that Mr. Michael Foster had been professor of physiology at Cambridge and, like Helen Verrall's father, belonged to that university.

I had several very clear experiments with Stella, a young lady who is not a professional medium and only took up spiritualism by chance. One day she found that on putting her hand on a table or planchette she obtained curious answers. She gave me striking examples of lucidity; I could not, however, decide whether this was telepathic or otherwise.

I made my experiments as strict as possible. In these experiments three persons were present — Stella, myself, and G., a B.Sc, and a skilful physician who had never seen Stella. I myself knew nothing at all of G.'s family. During these experiments not only did G. not touch the table, but he had his back turned to it, said no word, and made no sign. In the eight seances held, Stella gave the first names of G.'s wife, brothers, son, father, and father-in-law, names of which both Stella and I were entirely ignorant. Taking a probability of 1: 40 based on there being about 40 usual Christian names of men and the same number for women, the odds against successful results by chance are (TV)6; that is, 1 to 25,000,000,000, which is moral, if not mathematical, certainty.

The calculus of probabilities must be handled with caution, for it is not quite accurate to say that there were no failures, so that compounding failures with successes, the probability cannot be placed so high as (TV)6- Exaggerating the failures, we will admit six hesitations equivalent to failures. Then according SI

to the formula paqP, (see p. 57 ante), admitting six

a!/3!

failures and six successes, the compounded probability comes out as 26.6uo.ooo, wnich is just as much moral certainty as if one thousand times greater. Some of these failures are themselves instructive: Thus, the name of G.'s child was asked for. The answer was "Georgette/' which is wrong, for the child is a boy and is called Jean. Then G. told us that had the child been a girl, his wife and he had intended to call her Georgette, a fact that Stella and I of course did not know. G. asked the name of a brother, deceased. The answer was "Andre, but he is living." Now the name of the dead brother is not Andre, but there was a living brother Andre. This check is almost more interesting than a success.

Stella and I both knew that G. was born in Brittany, but nothing more. We asked the name of the town where he was born; the answer was Loria. We at once thought of Lorient; but in fact G. was born at Morlaix. As there is possible error between adjoining letters (by table-tipping to an alphabet), L may very well have been taken for M, and I for L. Although Stella and I were both convinced that the coming word should be Lorient, the fifth letter came as A in despite of us.

Stella was also able to give, through the table, the name of a childhood friend of G., and the word Kerveguen — the name of the house G. lived in at Morlaix. G. had just received a letter about his little son who was feverish. It was asked what the letter contained, these contents being unknown to us. The answer was "Jean, fever," and there was added, "laughs, carriage.,, Now G. had recently given to his son a little carriage with which the child had been greatly and unusually amused.

Various other proofs of lucidity were given me by Stella that I do not reproduce here, although they seem to me to carry proof, for I have only named those in which it was strictly impossible that she should, consciously or unconsciously, have been able to acquire her information by any normal means.

I will only cite two more facts:

1. I had taken a letter to my friend, Professor W. Stirling of Manchester, who had just come to Paris, and was at the Boulevard Saint-Michel. I had never mentioned Mr. Stirling before Stella. On the following day I said to her, "To whom have I been taking a letter at the Boulevard Saint-Michel?" She answered at once, "To your London friend." Nothing could have been more unlikely, for how could she suspect that among the many letters I might have taken to that place this would be to an English friend of whose existence she knew nothing?

The following instance is even more extraordinary. I saw Stella on the 2d of December, during the day, and on leaving I said, "I am going to give a lecture on snake-poison." She at once replied, "I dreamt last night of snakes, or rather of eels/' Then, without of course giving any reason, I asked her to tell me her dream, and her exact words were: "It was about eels more than snakes, two eels, for I could see their white shining bellies and their sticky skin; and I said to myself, T do not like these creatures, but it pains me when they are hurt/ 99 This dream was strangely conformable to what I had done the day before, December 1st. On that day I had, for the first time in twenty years, experimented with eels. Desiring to draw from them a little blood, I had put two eels on the table and their white, shining, iridescent, viscous bellies had particularly struck me. They had been fixed on the table for the removal of their hearts. I had certainly not spoken of this to Stella, whom I had not seen for some time, and she is not familiar with any one of the persons who frequent my laboratory.

I will here note, as characteristic of Stella's mediumship, and doubtless of that of many other sensitives, that she rarely gives a precise answer to a precise question. I had not asked her anything about what I had been doing on the previous day, and she had no idea that her dream had any reference to me. She only saw two eels. It is none the less a remarkable instance of cryptesthesia, for her words corresponded so well with the impression strongly made on my mind, that chance can have had nothing to do with the matter.

Lady Mabel Howard, writing automatically, was interrogated by one of her friends who had lost some jewelry. She wrote that it would be found under the bridge of Tebay, which seemed altogether unlikely. A month later it was discovered there (P. S. P. R., ix, 44).

Miss A., a writing medium, gave to Lady Radnor the name of Anna Chambers. This name was entirely unknown to the family. After minute research, it was found, through the Herald's office, that a certain Lady Exeter, an ancestress of Lady Radnor, had been Anna Chambers prior to her marriage.

Mr. Gordigiani, a student at the military school at Florence, showed spontaneous mediumship from the age of fifteen. One day in 1883, he being then seventeen years of age, an American lady, a widow named Mrs. B. M., was having her portrait painted by Signor Gordigiani, the young man's father, and expressed a desire to have a seance with the son. He wrote, "There is enmity that I do not understand between the lady and her deceased husband." When this, written in French, was translated to Mrs. B. M. she turned pale, stood up, and said, "What! Still?" Then as a more conciliatory reply was asked for, the inexorable writing answered, "Impossible, he is in Nigritie (? Nigeria). His mission is to influence the abolition of slavery. He is a negro."

Mrs. B. M. withdrew, very much moved, and the next day she said that her husband had been a coloured man, which had brought about a long estrangement between them (A. S. P., 1898, viii, 261).

On Friday, October 3, 1906, at Naples, Zingaropoli, at 8 p.m. was in spiritualist seance with a young medium and Signor Marzorati, the editor of the excellent review, Luce e Ombra. During this seance the medium announced that a sub-lieutenant of infantry in the barracks at Piedigrotta, Guglielmo Paternostro, had been killed by a revolver shot. This was the fact, reported in the Mattino of Naples, October 4, 1906 (A. S. P., 1906, xvi, 718).

Professor Feijao of Lisbon, in spiritist seances with Mme. Frondoni-Lacombe, received the name of his father by raps. He withdrew his hands from the table but continued to obtain clear and entirely correct replies to questions to which none of the persons present could have given answers.1

Dr. Moutin had attended Mme. Joubert in cholera. A few moments before her death, she cried out, "The mirror, the mirror!" pointing at a mirror on the mantelpiece. Her husband, a sailor, was absent. Dr. Moutin wrote the facts to him, and he knowing that the deceased often hid money, sought for it everywhere without success. Fifteen months later the spirit of Mme. Joubert stated at a seance to Dr. Moutin that a bond of the Fraissinet Company was hidden behind a mirror that M. Joubert had not examined, indicating its position. Dr. Moutin thereupon wrote to M. Joubert and the bond in question was found (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1910, xx, 1222).

Experiments with Mme. Frondoni are almost all concerned with objective metapsychics. They will be discussed more in detail later on.

Lady Mabel Howard gave Myers some good instances of clairvoyance. Myers had been invited to a certain lunch, concerning which Lady Mabel knew nothing, not even that it had taken place, but she said that six persons were then present

and that the gentleman who sat next to Myers was called Mo

There had been in fact six persons and Myers's neighbor was named Moultrie.

In another experiment it was asked, "Where is Don?" The pencil wrote, "Don is dead," which was true and unknown to anyone. Again, "Who is the best friend of a little girl who is there?" The answer was, "Mary," which was true. A book was found which had long been sought in vain.

The Tausch case, observed by Hyslop, proves surprising cryptesthesia. Mrs. Chenoweth (the pseudonym of Hyslop's medium), was interrogated on the subject of a certain German whose widow had written to Hyslop to get some communication from her deceased husband. Hyslop, without saying anything to Mrs. Chenoweth, obtained the name Taussh, Tauch, Taush; it was said that Taush knew William James, that he was a philosopher, that he was not in his home when he died, that he had a mania for putting watches to the correct time, that he had a bag in which he kept his spectacles and his manuscripts; minute details not accountable for by telepathy, but only by clairvoyance.

Mr. Isaac Funk, the well-known New York editor, experimenting with Mrs. Pepper, gave her a sealed letter in which he had written the word "Mother." Mrs. Pepper took the letter, gave the Christian name of Mr. Funk's mother, and said that she walked on one leg, adding, "Do you not remember that needle?" Mrs. Funk had run a needle into her foot. Mrs. Pepper also saw at the side of Mrs. Funk her grandson, "Chester." At the moment Mr. Funk could not remember the name, but, on enquiry, found that his mother had a little grandson of that name who had died twenty years before in a Western State (A. S. P., 1905, xv, 246).

Yza Trisk, in a spiritist seance at Stockholm, received the following communication: "I left the earth twenty-four hours since, and I am come to thank you." There was also a mediumistic drawing which was recognized as the portrait of a Finnish poet whom all thought to be living. This poet, whom Yza Trisk knew slightly, the author of the Finnish national hymn, had just died in Italy. Is it established that at the time of this seance no announcement had appeared in any Stockholm paper? (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1910, 264).

Commandant Darget, accompanied by his wife and daughter, visited Mme. Bonnard, a professional medium, who spoke on that occasion as if she were Mme. Darget's mother. A proof of identity being asked for, it was said, "I am very glad to see that white flowers have been put on my grave." Now a cousin visiting Poitiers, where Mme. Darget's mother was interred, had placed white flowers on her tomb (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1909, xix, 322).

W. Stead, in presence of Mrs. R., wrote automatically (nominally from Julia), that Mrs. R. had had a fall and injured her spine. Mrs. R. denied this, but Julia (by the hand of Stead) wrote, "She has forgotten; it was seven years ago at Streaton in Illinois; there was snow. On reaching Mrs. Buell's house, Mrs. R. slipped on the edge of the pavement, fell, and hurt her back." Then Mrs. R. remembered the incident, which she had completely forgotten (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 110).

In 1874, Stainton Moses, having been magnetized by Du Potet, wrote automatically, "I killed myself today." The writing was accompanied by a very rough drawing, with the words, "Under the steam-roller in Baker Street where the medium passed by." The next day, after enquiry, Stainton Moses learned that a man had been crushed in Baker Street by the steam-roller (Delanne, loc. ext., 34).

Mr. Mackenzie, though unaccustomed to shooting, spent a day in the shooting fields; in the evening playing two games of billiards with his father, winning both. On the same day Mr. Nicholson, who lived one hundred and twenty miles distant, and hardly knew Mr. Mackenzie, obtained through the table the name Mackenzie. "He plays billiards with his father and wins both games; he has been out shooting', {A. S. P., 1919, xxix, No. 30).

Mrs. Eflfia Bathes was converted to metapsychism by the following entirely demonstrative fact: She went one day to a professional clairvoyant whom she did not know and who did not know her. The medium described to her a deceased brother, and he, speaking through the medium, said that he had been to his old home and was sad to find that his collection of fossils was no longer in his room. This brother, a student at Cambridge, had made a fine collection of fossils. After his death part of this collection had been given to the Cambridge museum; the rest

ined in his room. Some time later Mrs. Bathes learned that their mother had presented these to the museum at Bristol.

At Vilna, January 15, 1887, at the house of the engineer Kaigodoroff, Miss Emma Stramtn, acting as the medium, said that Augustus Duvanel had died of a congestion of the blood. Then another communication was received announcing that this was not true, but that he had committed suicide at Zurich on the 15th of January, 1887. It appears that the father of Emma Stramm and also the guide who gave the table-messages both desired to spare Emma the pain of learning that the young man had committed suicide (by reason of disappointed love for Emma). This romantic story signifies nothing; and it is to be regretted that any serious work should take note of such tales.

An eminent physician, Dr. Santo-Liquido, director of the Office of Hygiene at Rome, has analyzed very ably the phenomena of cryptesthesia that he observed in a member of his own family — a distinguished lady — who without having desired them, presented the phenomena of raps and automatic writing. Signor Santo-Liquido, like all of us, was absolutely sceptical of socalled spiritist phenomena; but he had to give in to the evidence that mediums occasionally acquire knowledge that transcends the normal. One day, Louise (the medium), said to him in trance, "Instead of criticizing my experiments you would do better to occupy yourself with your report which is not completed. " Santo-Liquido was absolutely convinced that this important report had been sent to the Minister of the Interior fifteen days before; but the following day he ascertained that through an incredible act of negligence by a subordinate, it had been left in the portfolio containing the case.

Many times Louise has correctly indicated unforeseen facts, and has also given many instances of cryptesthesia. Once she said to Signor Santo-Liquido, "You will be called to Genoa, but Signor Giolitti will not let you go.', Both were unlikely, but the next day he was urgently called to Genoa by a member of his family, and at the same time received a telegram from the Premier that he must on no account leave Rome, as Signor Giolitti needed him.1

M. Tola Dorian, during a spiritist seance, learned that his friend H. de Lacretelle had just died in Paris, the phrasing being

Communicated to the International Metapsychic Institute of Paris, and published in their bulletin No. i of 1920.

that he was discarnate. He had in fact died that night, February 16, 1899, at Paris, and not, as M. Dorian thought, at Macon (A S. P., xxix, 242).

Some instances of spiritist cryptesthesia are mentioned in M Cornillier's book.1 Unfortunately they are but few, and this book being devoted less to the demonstration of clairvoyance than to presenting the ideas of the subconscious on spiritualist theories, it is difficult to cite much from it with reference to lucidity. It is the story of a young girl, Reine X., aged fifteen, who, in a first spiritist experience, obtained raps without contact. She was then magnetized by M. Cornillier, and the subsequent phenomena (all subjective) occurred in a state of somnambulism. They must be classed as spiritist, for she had a "guide" (Vettellini?) who dictated her answers. It is, however, a small matter whether the classification is spiritist or somnambulist, for these two modalities are often admixed.

The first time that M. Cornillier magnetized Reine she went (in imagination) to M. Cornillier's room, which was separate from his studio, and into which she had never been, and described various details — some ivory brushes, an oval mirror, and two small portraits on the mantelpiece.

Another time she went to see M. S. O., a friend of M. Cornillier, whom she saw sitting at his desk writing a business letter; with a lady beside him in an armchair to the right of the desk. All this was correct; but what does it prove?

Reine, sent to see the house of M. X. at B. (he had died six years before), said that there was a very old tower (correct), and speaking of M. X., she said, "He likes to take long walks and to paint," both being characteristic of M. X.

She seems also to have had a premonition (p. 417). On the 26th of August, 1913, she "saw" M. Cornillier taking a train, dressed in black and looking sad, and this vision was repeated on the night of the 28th. On the 30th she "saw" M. C. packing his valise. On the 1st of September M. C. received news of the death of a cousin, and he took the train to be present at the funeral, wearing mourning. Unfortunately M. C. does not mention whether Reine might not have learned of the cousin's illness by normal means.

*P. E. Cornillier, La survivance de I'dtne, et son evolution apres la mort, Comptes rendus d' experiences, Paris, Alcan, 1920, 570 pp.

Reine was also able to give the name of a lady, Jeanne B., speaking through her (p. 504) who gave many correct particulars concerning her son, Marcel, a cavalry soldier, and of her husband, who had caused her much sorrow, and whom she had divorced. All these details were found true, but it is impossible to admit the certainty, or even the likelihood, of cryptesthesia, for we are not told that Reine could not have known Mme. B., who was a modiste.

All these facts have therefore very little weight; and despite the pains taken by M. Cornillier there is so much lacking in his book that we cannot build much upon it. The opinions of Vettellini (i.e., the subconsciousness of Reine), on this world and the other leave us very cold; the exact demonstration of the smallest fact of cryptesthesia or premonition would have a higher value. The valuable reports of Mrs. Sidgwick, R. Hodgson, and J. Hyslop are unexceptionable in this respect; and the admirable report by Sir Oliver Lodge of his seances with Mrs. Piper are models of what such reports should be.

M. Mamtchitch was present for the first time at a spiritist seance at Kieff in 1875. Returning home, he placed himself at the table and put questions by the alphabet. He got the name Palladia, and the words, "Put the angel back in its place, or it will fall." On the following morning he visited the cemetery, where he had never previously been, and found the tomb, buried in snow. The marble statue of an angel bearing a cross was leaning much to one side (Bozzano, A. S. P., 1909, xix, 324).

Mr. Massey, interviewing Miss Lottie Fowler, a medium, gave her the glove of one of his friends, named Pigott, entirely unknown to Miss Fowler; she said, "It is very funny, I can get nothing but Pig, Pig" (Myers, Human Personality, ii, 562).

Sir William Barrett, quoted by Miss Dallas (A. S. P.f July, 1916, xxvi, 112), gives a fact of cryptesthesia by the wife of an eminent Irish doctor who had the faculty of automatic writing. She wrote the name of a cousin of hers killed in action and that he was betrothed to a lady whose full name and address were given. The engagement had been kept entirely secret even from the family of the deceased officer.

Dr. Speakman, experimenting with two young English ladies at Pau with a planchette, mentioned a Mrs. Sarah Lamy, who had died a few days previously. Sarah stated that her daughter's name was Rose (correct), and that she, Sarah, would manifest her presence to her husband by rapping on the foot of the bed. That very evening Mr. Lamy heard raps on his bed. She added that there would be difficulties with the lawyers; and in fact unforeseen difficulties, which had nothing to do with Mrs. Lamy's death, did actually arise. There were other veridical announcements (A.S. P., xix, 330).

Mrs. Leonard, who has given such admirable proofs of clairvoyance to Sir Oliver Lodge, gave also very good proofs of cryptesthesia to Miss Radclyffe Hall and Lady Troubridge.1

The memorandum is divided into five chapters.

1. A description of the communicator; i.e., of the person supposed to be speaking — a Mrs. A. V. B. — a friend of Miss R. H. and Lady T., who died aged fifty-seven years and was quite unknown to Mrs. Leonard. She was exactly described by Feda, Mrs. Leonard's guide. Sometimes Miss R. H. touched the table lightly, but the answers were mostly given verbally. Feda said that Mrs. A. V. B. was paralyzed on the right side of her mouth (correct), and the description of the lady was very exact.

2. Complete descriptions of places entirely unknown to Mrs Leonard which had been visited by Miss R. H. and Mrs. A. V. B. during life; more especially Teneriffe and the Canary Islands. She spoke of two little monkeys, of a climate neither too hot nor too cold, of a path over cinders, and of a place named Cruth, Vera. Vera Cruth, Teneriffe, Mazagal. (Mrs. A. V. B. and Miss R. H. had visited Teneriffe, Santa Cruz, and Mazagra, in Morocco, together.)

3. Other proofs of strong lucidity were given, as to which the ladies can give no details, these being of too intimate a nature for publication. The house of Lady T., her dining-room, and her blue dressing-gown were exactly described.

4. Abundant details were given of "Daisy" (pseudonym) whom A. V. B. had known, details of which neither Miss R. H. nor Lady T. could be aware of.

Without entering into further circumstantial detail it is clear that Mrs. Leonard's cryptesthesia is very powerful, and, like Mrs. Piper, she has cognizance of facts that no mental transmission

lOn a series of sittings with Mrs. Osborne Leonard, by Miss Radclyffe Hall and Lady Troubridge, P. P. R., December, 191 9, xxx, 339-547- Although confident of the medium's good faith, Miss R. H. and Lady T., who had never frequented spiritualist circles, employed detectives to make sure that no enquiries had been made by Mrs. Leonard.

can account for. These remarkable experiments prove once more that cryptesthesia is a real faculty that cannot be explained by invoking telepathy.

Mrs. Thompson gave some good instances of cryptesthesia to Myers and to some other persons. This manifests itself in a somnambulic state that comes on spontaneously when she wishes to make an experiment. Then Nelly, a little daughter that she has lost, speaks through her and talks in a baby language, as Feda does with Mrs. Leonard. The phenomena presented are intermediate between hypnotic and spiritist cryptesthesia.1

Mrs. Thompson gave me an excellent proof of lucidity. Myers had brought her to me for experiment. That evening my son Georges handed his watch to her, asking if she could say anything about it. She replied after some hesitation, 'Three generations mixed. " It would have been hard to say anything more descriptive, for the watch had been given by his grandfather, Felix Aubry, to his son Georges Aubry. After the death of the latter at the battle of Vendome in 1870, M. Felix Aubry had had the watch back, and on his death he had left it to my son Georges.

Mrs. Thompson, being on the terrace at Monaco, saw an old gentleman and an old lady playing with a dog. She walked towards them and, without apparent reason, spoke to them, saying, soon after, that she had seen the word Carqueiranne over their heads. Now M. and Mme. Moutonnier were due to go to Carqueiranne with Myers to meet Mrs. Thompson herself. She had never heard M. and Mme. Moutonnier spoken of.

Dr. Frederic van Eeden, a Dutch physician living at Bussum, was introduced to Mrs. Thompson by F. Myers, but with great care to conceal his name and nationality from her. In the course of the seance Mrs. Thompson called him Mr. Bussum, said that he had a relation named Frederic and was a gardener in Eden. Dr. van Eeden had brought a piece from the clothes of a young man who had committed suicide, without, however, telling any one of the fact. Mrs. Thompson gave his Christian name and described his character. She said that he had blood on his throat, which agreed with the manner of the suicide. When Dr. van Eeden spoke in Dutch, Mrs. Thompson understood him quite

^ee also Dr. Fr. van Eeden, Quelques observations sur les phSnotnenes dits spirites, Congr. Univ. de psychologie de Paris, 1900 et A. S. P., 1901, xi, 240-52.

well, though she did not speak that language.1 She recalled to Dr. van Eeden the conversation he had had with the deceased, and Dr. van Eeden in the end was absolutely convinced that there had been real communication with the departed. This personal conviction of an experienced psychologist like Dr. van Eeden has much weight.

James Hyslop has studied with extreme care a case of cryptesthesia which seems to him a proof of personal identity: Mr. Thomson, goldsmith and photographer, had known slightly a distinguished painter — Robert Swain Gifford — whom he had met once or twice on the marshes of North Bedford. He had also visited him once.

Gifford died in January, 1905, and Thomson that summer felt a first impulse to sketch and paint. At an exhibition of Gifford's works he seemed to hear a voice telling him, "Finish what I have begun." Thomson then began to make pictures in Gifford's style, some of them strikingly so. If it were rigorously proved that Thomson had neither seen, nor could have seen, Gifford's unfinished sketches, the demonstration of cryptesthesia would be astounding. But Thomson, whatever his honesty, cannot answer for his subconscious recollections, so that the case does not prove very much. It would be needful to prove that these unfinished sketches were absolutely unknown to Thomson. Flournoy was much more exacting with Helen Smith, and very properly so.2 It seems to us impossible to admit the possession of Thomson by Gifford's spirit.

Similarly the case cited by Aksakoff cannot be considered demonstrative. A nurse, Anastasia Perelyguine, poisoned herself and died in the little town of Tamboff on the 16th of November. On the 18th the name Anastasia was given at a seance, with details of her suicide. It does not affect the case that the medium and sitters state that they knew nothing of the matter; it would be quite enough that they had heard (and forgotten) between the 16th and 18th some talk of it, for the incident to be referable to subconscious memory. These are very doubtful cases that cannot be taken into account; for in metapsychics as in all other sciences doubtful demonstrations do more harm than good.

Grasset, in his book published in 1908, would seem to have deliberately omitted cases that prove telepathy; and as he only

sCf., p. 224.

2Amer. S. P. R., 1910 and A. S. P., 1910, xx, 193-264.

mentions poor and uncertain ones he has no difficulty in deducing the nullity of telepathy (cryptesthesia). But this is not fair discussion. The stories in L'Echo du merveilleux, and likewise the accounts given by Aksakoff, are often very questionable both as observations and in their interpretation.1

Mrs. C, who is in no way a professional medium, gave a seance to Messrs. Venzano and Bozzano in the Minerva circle at Genoa. At the outset the raps indicated to Mrs. C. that her infant Robert, whom she had left at home quite well, was in high fever. She at once left and found that the child was very feverish, the servant being very anxious about him. The incident is not demonstrative, for various reasons.

Mr. Venzano, experimenting with the Misses G. (non-professional), whose hands were the only ones on the table (rappings). was thinking of a friend some years dead. This name was given and also that of a fellow-student of himself and his dead friend. Near the close of the seance the name Cipriani was given. Searching his memory, Venzano recollected that this was the familiar name of an octogenarian relation several years dead. Then, unrequested, the table gave the name Teresa Bartolini, who was the wife of Cipriani {A. S. P., 1905, xv, 694).

At a private seance in the house of Mme. J. H. at Paris, Rue Saint-Charles (xv arr.) near the fortifications, on July 31, 1914, the Count Ugo Baschieri exclaimed suddenly, "An important person is about to be assassinated. What quantities of blood! What is the time?" The clock showed 9:40 p.m. "Well, something has happened near the Boulevard des Italiens." On that date, between 9:35 and 9:40, about three hundred yards from the Boulevard des Italiens, M. Jaures was the victim of a cowardly assassination.

This cannot be classed as a premonition, for the event took place simultaneously with the announcement. Of course chance may be invoked as usual by persons who are resolved to deny everything, but that is a very poor explanation.

This case much resembles that of the assassination of Queen Draga mentioned later on, and also the well-known case cited by De Vesme, of Apollonius of Tyana, who during a lecture at

^rasset, he. ext., 316. The chapter on the detail of facts is but 13 pages, of which two are devoted to Mme. Couesdon, the seeress of the Rue Saint-Denis, and two to Mr. Dace, the well-known (?) young occultist. Is such criticism worthy of M. Grasset?

Ephesus, suddenly broke off, saying that the tyrant Domitian had been killed at Rome. The story is given by Philostratus and Dio Cassius in his history; but can we believe it?

M. Lemaire, a professor at Geneva, experimenting with H. Smith, says that the medium, at the outset of the seance, "smelt stones"; she said that one Jean had come for Mrs. N., who had attended some previous seances. Mrs. N., searching her memory, remembered that when a child this man Jean, a working quarryman, had a great affection for her. His work used to be tc prepare and light the fuses for blasting (A. S. P., 1897, vii. 74). It is an unimportant matter.

Mr. Arthur Hill reports some very conclusive experiments. One of his friends, a Mr. Frank Knight, went (absolutely incognito), to Miss MacDonald, a professional medium, who told his name (Frank), the name of his mother (Freda Katherine), the names of his sister and brother (Janet and Herbert), and of Benjamin, his uncle.

Another medium, Mr. Watson, gave Mr. Knight the name of his mother (Mary Katherine), of his great-grandfather (Oliver Upton), and of two of his relations (Kathleen Thornes and Benjamin Thornes), to which names Watson added the name "Carter" which is a family name of Mr. Knight, but disused for more than a century.

Other very numerous investigations with Watson were made, which seem to have resulted in convincing even a person so little inclined to credulity as Mr. Arthur Hill of the reality of cryptesthesia. Even if we make the rather absurd supposition that Watson made enquiry at the cemeteries so as to get information by the names on all tombs relating to the numerous family of the Knights, that would not explain the whole. These investigations were very carefully studied in full detail by Mr. Arthur Hill1 (pp. 113-116). I think therefore he is justified in saying:

1. That frauds due to extensive, difficult, and almost impossible researches, very prolonged and numerous, made by mediums, the better to deceive those who consult them, are extremely unlikely. The detectives employed to watch Mrs. Piper discovered nothing. It is also to be observed that any mediums making such enquiries would always be risking discovery in flagrante delicto of prepared imposture, which would ruin their reputation.

xNew Evidence in Psychical Research, with an introduction by Sir Oliver Lodge, London, W. Ridder, 191 1.

2. The observers are not hallucinated.

3. The probability of some successes in research on cryptesthesia is so small that chance cannot be invoked with decency.

4. In fine, everything depends on rigorous methods and conditions of experiment. If the experimenter remains absolutely silent, refraining from the slightest signs of approval or negation; if he is quite impassive and takes full notes on all that is said, then the experiment is valuable. Such impassiveness and complete record of all the medium's speeches is, however, very difficult.

Mme. Briffaut, of Paris, has given many and certain proofs of lucidity. Among these, out of many others, I will quote the following: Mme. G. de Montebello, visiting her, and quite sure that Mme. Briffaut could not know her name or anything about her, received a convincing proof of cryptesthesia: "I see someone who calls himself L. Louis, is it not?" Mme. de M. inclines her head affirmatively. "He is your son?" Yes. "He was killed in the war?" No. "Nevertheless," said Mme. Briffaut, "he signs to me that he died suddenly and violently all at once." Now in fact Louis de Montebello was struck by lightning before the war. If Mme. Briffaut made a mistake it was only in the interpretation; she had been made aware of sudden and violent death and concluded (wrongly but reasonably) that this took place in the war. Other exact and valuable details were given. By the side of Mme. de Montebello Mme. Briffaut saw an old lady steadily writing. This referred very clearly to the grandmother of Mme. de M., who spent the last fifteen years of her life in writing her memoirs.

This experiment with Mme. de M. is a very satisfactory one, but with some other persons Mme. Briffaut's results were nil. Such cases of clairvoyance seem to depend almost as much on the percipient as on the agent. Mme. de Montebello usually gets extraordinarily detailed and precise answers when she consults a medium, a sensitive, or a somnambulist, so that I am inclined to think that a medium's lucidity does not work indifferently for everyone. There are some who "inspire" them, and some who do not.

My daughter, Mme. A. G. Le Ber, whose name was known to Mme. Briffaut, received a number of particulars the value of which is scarcely diminished by the name being known. Indeed to learn all that was said, Mme. Briffaut would have had to enter on long and difficult enquiries, and in any case she indicated verbatim a very private conversation that Mme. Le Ber had with her brother Albert, killed in the war, and this private conversation was known to no living person, except to Mme. Le Ber herself.

Arnaud de Gramont, under the pseudonym of Dr. X., went to see Mme. Briffaut and told her that he had lost a son in the war. Mme. B. said, "He was killed by a wound in the head, he fell from a great height; he was in the Flying Corps" (correct). She saw the name S...mont. The first name of M. de Gramont's son was Sanche.

The Bulletins Nos. 1 and 2 of the International Metapsychics Institute (Paris), 1920, contain many interesting details on Mme. Briffaut's cryptesthesia. To Mr. Jean Lefebvre, who was quite unknown to her, she gave the names of his brothers Pierre and Joseph. She said that the wife of the latter had died less than a year before from an operation on the liver (correct). To Mr. Lemerle, a cautious and trained observer, whom she could not have known, she said at once, "I see Jacques! a young man who died tragically. I hear him call: he writes Jean, Henri..." Both the sons of Mr. Lemerle had been victims of a serious accident to an automobile. Henri was killed, but Jacques escaped death. The Revue Spirite of May, 1921 (p. 144), contains a notable case of Mme. Briffaut's clairvoyance.

Analogous facts to those given by Mme. Briffaut in Paris and by Mrs. Leonard in London were obtained by a sensitive named Ludwig Aub, of Munich.1

A medical student went to see Aub, giving neither his name nor his profession. Aub told him, "You are a medical student, you are fond of music, especially Mozart. Your father was a physician, also your grandfather, at Stettin." To Dr. O. Aut said, "Your father was a philosopher, your mother is of English birth but lived in Austria. You have recently been married" (all details correct). To Dr. S. he said, "It is characteristic of you that you have in your house a large picture of the time of Albert Diirer; it is valuable, and you take great pride in it" (correct). To Dr. G. he said, "You have a predilection for Gustave Flaubert." That very morning Dr. G. had written a preface to the works of Flaubert.

Mr. Hayward has methodically analyzed the answers given by

aVon R. Tischner, Eine physiologisch-okkultistische Studie (Psychische Studien, xlvii, 1920, 598-612). Tischner cites various publications on Aub that appeared at Munich, by Dr. Dingfelder, G. W. de Surga, and others.

Mrs. K. near Montreal; but they do not show any very high degree of lucidity (Fortune-telling, Am. P. S. P. R.f 1921, 185).

To sum up: From all these experiences of cryptesthesia whether with sensitives, mediums, or somnambules, one very clear conclusion emerges — that there is a faculty of cognition by other means than by the ordinary sensorial channels.

At the present time it cannot be doubted it has become almost a commonplace and will soon be generally admitted; people will then marvel that it should have been so long misunderstood, ridiculed, and denied by official science.

I may be allowed to recall with some pride that in 1888 (P. S. P. R., v) I clearly affirmed this strange fact that now dominates all subjective metapsychics: "In certain persons, at certain times, there exists a faculty of cognition which has no relation to our normal means of knowledge."

