Myers quotes (A. S. P., 1901, xi, 297) the case of Miss A., looking into the crystal in presence of Sir Joseph Burnby; she describes a tall dark lady in the room of a hotel; the door is open and she is about to wash her hands. Sir Joseph thinks of his wife. Miss A. adds, "She is wearing a serge dress with a great deal of braid on the bodice and a band of braid on one side of the skirt." Sir Joseph thinks that the figure cannot be that of his wife; but on returning to Eastbourne some days later he found that Lady Burnby had bought such a dress and that the description of her washing her hands in the hotel room with an open door was accurate. Miss A. did not know Lady Burnby, but some months later on seeing her entering a theatre said, "That is the lady in a serge dress that I saw in the crystal."

In certain cases, instead of looking into the crystal, a large shell is held to the ear, as children do "to hear the sound of the sea." This is another empirical method of arousing cryptesthesia. When Miss X. listens thus she hears confused noises, sometimes musical notes, or human voices speaking distinct words. One day she suddenly hears "Endsleigh Street," a name she does not know. A few minutes later she is told that Mr. H. has come to London from Oxford. "Is he living here as usual?" She was told no, he has taken a room in Endsleigh Street.

Another time Miss X. hears the words, "Are you a vegetarian?" as if pronounced by Mr. Smith whom she has just left; the fact being that Mr. Smith a few minutes later asked Mr. M., whom he had met by chance, "Are you a vegetarian?" The letter of enquiry addressed by Miss X. to Mr. Smith was written before she had learned that these words had really been spoken.

Vision in the crystal or hearing by a shell seems to be restricted to sensitives; it therefore does not pertain to cryptesthesia in normal persons, but only to sensitives. The phenomena are slight in comparison with those obtained at spiritist seances.



6. Conclusions on Experimental Cryptesthesia

Alike in normal persons, sensitives, somnambulists, and mediums, the fact of cryptesthesia is beyond question.

Even if we were to make the absurd admission that threefourths of the reported facts are erroneous, there would still remain a series of verified facts that defy criticism and render it certain that there is a strange faculty of cognition in human beings that brings information which could not possibly be acquired by the normal senses.

It seems to me quite unscientific to attempt to fix limits to this power, and to say that it will come into play on a given day or hour and under given conditions. Since this faculty of higher cognition exists (called "supernormal" by Myers), why not say, Nihil a me alienum puto? It has been shown that this faculty of cryptesthesia is not limited by time or space. Let us then use this discovery to denote the phenomena of monition, premonition, and clairvoyance that are so numerous and undeniable. It covers nearly all that seems so marvellous. As soon as it is certain that by any means soever human consciousness can be aware of the contents of a closed envelope, or of that which moves the emotion of a person near us, or of a distant friend who is thinking of us, I do not see what limits can be assigned to this power. In presence of any fact of subjective metapsy chics, however marvellous, I dare not say, "This is beyond the power of lucidity."

Certainly cryptesthesia is very strange and we do not in any way understand it, but that is no reason for introducing gods, angels, demons, or spirits after the fashion of savages who ascribe natural forces to a fantastic divinity rewarding or tormenting poor mortals. It is hardly rational to call in the spirits of the dead. We recognize in cryptesthesia a higher human faculty as yet unknown by our intellect; we must stop there, provisionally at any rate.

We will, however, go a little further. In order that cryptesthesia should come into action, something in us must be moved, for every effect has its cause. There must therefore be some mysterious external vibration that acts on our organism. It is in this sense that cryptesthesia is necessarily pragmatic, for if there were nothing external to set it in motion, the mind could perceive nothing. But we are in absolute ignorance as to what that vibration may be; and in the present embryonic stage of metapsychics we shall not seek to discover it.

The important thing is the proven fact: that certain individuals at certain times are aware of facts, and receive impressions that cannot be referred to normal senses but which nevertheless agree with real external events. This affirmation is based on various proofs, which we will sum up at this point.

1. In making experiments of thought-transference or telepathy (which is only a particular form of cryptesthesia) it is found, even when experimenting with normal persons, that there is always a small excess of correct results over the number that chance alone would give according to the calculus of probability; though this excess is not large enough for definite conclusions.

2. With hypnotized and hypnotizable subjects the divergence between the probable and the real number of successes is so large that the excess cannot possibly be referred to chance. Certain somnambulists give answers so precise, reproduce words, writings, and drawings with such exactitude and so abundantly, that the cryptesthesia, indicated by experiment with normal persons, becomes undeniable.

3. In spiritist seances, in which an external personality seems to dictate the answers, and especially with powerful mediums such as Mrs. Piper, the proof of cryptesthesia is overwhelming; though it is not possible to conclude, in any way satisfactory to strict science, that an intelligent external personality intervenes.

4. Experimenting with sensitives gives many instances of cryptesthesia, sometimes as striking as those with hypnotized persons and mediums.

5. Cryptesthesia is most frequently manifested in the shape of telepathy (thought-reading) but it also gives facts unknown to any person present. And now, as the mass of facts proves the existence of the faculty, we may make some attempt to understand it.

Let us suppose that no individual of the human race had the sense of smell. No one could have the least idea what a scent could be. Passing by a dung-heap or a field of violets we should be unaware of either if they were out of sight, they being neither visible nor making any sound. If, then, some exceptional individual should be gifted with the sense of smell, we should be enormously surprised, if when passing the unseen dung-heap or violets he could tell us, There is manure here, or violets there.

This exceptional individual could also, by his sense of smell, be aware of facts long past. If a grain of iodoform had been placed in a cupboard ten years ago, the scent of iodoform would still be perceptible; and if our exceptional individual endowed with transitory olfactory sense then said, There has been iodoform in this cupboard, what extraordinary lucidity we should consider it to be.

As it is, we find it difficult to understand the extreme acuity of smell with which some animals are endowed; for instance, how the males of certain moths are attracted from considerable distances by the odour of the female moth, and how a dog can track a hare that has passed an hour ago. We are surprised, but we understand more or less that these cases are the hyper-sensitiveness of a faculty which we possess in a rudimentary state. If we were entirely destitute of this faculty we should understand nothing at all of the facts.

To return to the exceptional man who from time to time has some vague olfactory sense; if he cannot analyze his imperfect, rudimentary, and fugitive perceptions, he will find it very difficult to explain how he was able to say, There were violets on the right, and a dung-heap on the left. As his sensation is transitory, he will try to recall it, but in vain; he has said, "There are violets," but the scent has vanished, and he does not even know why he made the statement. This knowledge that he cannot account for has crossed his mind in a flash, and he has now become like to other men, having no olfactory sense. He does not even know what "a scent" may be. He only knows that he had the idea of violets. The more he tries the less he is able *o say what made him exclaim, "There are violets near."

This, of course, is an analogy and nothing more; but it enables us to conceive how some vibrations from the external world may reach us and, by awaking confused and transitory ideas, may give us cognitions whose origins are unknown and perhaps unknowable. These ideas and cognitions are in the realm of the subconscious; the conscious self is hardly touched by them. Lodge ingeniously compares the conscious and the unconscious parts of the mind to a man who is swimming — his head alone is out of the water, but the rest of him is there, unseen all the while. It is probable that cryptesthesia is more especially manifested by those individuals whose conscious self is somewhat inactive. The subconscious movements of writing, with or without the planchette, are mostly produced when the conscious self is in a state of semi-somnolence. Unconscious sensations have then more hold and determine more precise movements than when the crowd of reasoned, voluntary, and purposeful ideas dominate the consciousness. Lucidity is more common in the hypnotic sleep that in the normal state, and monitions occur oftener in sleep than in waking hours because during waking life the exterior influences of our environment impinge strongly on our normal senses and prevent our perception of the unknown energies (probably much feebler) that move our cryptesthesia.

But whatever theory we adopt, cryptesthesia exists; in other words, the human intelligence has modes of cognition that are unknown to us.

There is no ground for surprise, for the smallest reflection on the immense fertility of nature will reveal that there are forces unknown to us. No man of sense and intelligence can imagine that there are no forces in the cosmos but those analyzed in our text-books of physics. Since, then, there are unknown forces in the universe, jt^is possible that these may influence us; the whole crux of the matter is whether our being is now moved by them. To affirm that unknown forces exist is not to prove that cryptesthesia exists, but simply to demonstrate that cryptesthesia is possible.

It may be otherwise stated: There are forces that our normal consciousness does not perceive, but that are occasionally perceived by our subconsciousness. If it were proved that there are no forces in nature but heat, light, electricity, and gravitation we should be almost justified in denying cryptesthesia, but as soon as it is admitted that there are other forces — and that cannot be denied, whether they have or have not been described or discovered — then cryptesthesia becomes not merely possible but likely.1

Does this imply that the fact of cryptesthesia will revolutionize science and establish a new era in psychology, physiology, and physics? From the theoretic point of view this may be so, but practically, however interesting, it will only very slightly modify social life. It seems to occur so rarely and to need such special artifices in experimentation, that perhaps it plays but a minor part in the daily life of each of us.

Nevertheless it is probable that the external world that lies outside our normal perceptions — and in this I include the thoughts of other men — may influence our acts, our wills, and our feelings, because it acts continuously upon us without our being aware of it. Though always weak and vague, and often ineffective, the human thoughts and the unknown vibrations of things must yet exert some influence. In any case, the fact that they are still profoundly mysterious is no reason for refusing to study them.

These unknown vibrations certainly exist. They can at rare moments touch the subconscious elements of our mind and thence

xIn this connection see the admirable note by Sir William Crookes on the probable continuity of vibratory phenomena, and the gaps in our physical organization for the perception of the greater part of these vibrations.

come into consciousness. It is much to be able to make so precise a statement in despite of the scornful denials of official science and the mocking incredulity of the crowd.1



7. On the Identification of Spiritist Personalities

When dealing with automatic writing we made allusion to the hypothesis that spiritualists advance almost as an article of faith that a vanished human personality intervenes; that there is an "incarnation" of a dead person whose intelligence animates the body of mediums and writes or speaks through them. This identification of spiritist personalities with the dead is a serious question that demands profound consideration; for the personalities that appear seem real, and a great effort of rationalism is required to withstand the simple and alluring hypothesis that the dead return.

Helen Smith, the celebrated medium, studied by Flournoy, took on the personality of Marie Antoinette, and played that part for many months with a perfection that the cleverest actresses might envy. But it is difficult to see in this anything more than a prolonged and marvellous auto-suggestion. In the absence of very weighty proofs (which Helen Smith did not give), I agree with my learned friend T. Flournoy in refusing to admit that the unfortunate queen animated the humble personality of Helen Smith.

Mrs. Piper presented a first "incarnation" — that of a certain French doctor of Metz, of the very curious name Phinuit — as her guide, who spoke by her voice. But the name has never been discovered in the archives of Metz, and Phinuit could not speak French. When asked how it came about that he had forgot-

1Many new facts of cryptesthesia have been reported which establish conclusively the existence of the faculty without throwing much light on its mechanism.

The best experiments are those with Stepan Ossovietzki. They are most exact (Revue Metapsychique, 1921, i, 420-431). All precautions were taken; the sealed letter was never lost sight of by the experimenters, and Ossovietzki does not seek to read the contents. He kneads it in his hands, rubs it, and after having stated its contents, hands it back to the experimenters who verify the seal and open it themselves. The envelope was thick enough to preclude vision even by retinal hyperesthesia.

Therefore hypotheses of defective experiment or retinal hyperesthesia must be finally dismissed. No complicity was possible, for none of the experimenters knew the contents of the envelopes. Since there could be neither trickery nor illusion, there is absolute certainty, and the only alternatives are cryptesthesia or chance (second French edition).

ten his French, he answered in all seriousness that he had had so many English patients at Metz that he had forgotten his maternal tongue.

Between the first hypothesis, that Marie Antoinette was incarnate in Helen Smith, Phinuit in Mrs. Piper, Dickens in the medium James; and the second hypothesis, that these three mediums had a subconscious intelligence acute enough to take on the roles of Marie Antoinette, Phinuit, and Dickens, I do not hesitate a moment in preferring the second. Human intelligence is so wonderfully and mysteriously endowed that it may doubtless be able to enact perfectly the most complex parts. That is assuredly very strange; but this strangeness is not the enormous absurdity that, despite the guillotine and the worms of the tomb, Marie Antoinette and Dickens should return to visit us and that their souls should intervene in our lives.

And, in addition, as many experiments show, the discarnate souls (to use the spiritist phrase), are manifestly very different from that which they were in earth-life. Such extraordinary cases as Marie Antoinette and Dickens are the rarest exceptions. Nearly always the discarnates show very moderate intelligence indeed, and give utterance to commonplaces of a special kind with a "spiritoid" complexion — to use the picturesque barbarism adopted by Flournoy and Lombroso. They hardly remember what they were; they give poor answers to the most elementary questions. In a seance with Eusapia Paladino (who, by the way, never produced any subjective phenomena worthy of interest), a hand touched me, alleged by John King to be that of my father. As a preliminary sign of identity I asked for his first name; but this, so very easy to supply, was not given.

In another experiment with a professional medium, to whom I was absolutely unknown, I obtained by automatic writing a long, verbose, and insignificant message ending in a pun. "Je

fais une; je dis, nous; j'admire Tart; reunis ces trois mots

et tu auras le nom de ta mere." Her name was Renouard; (Raie. nous, art). This cannot be fortuitous, but I absolutely refuse to imagine that the soul of my mother had nothing to say to me but this idiotic play on words.

The idea that Aristotle should return to us to tell us in French, English, or Italian that the future of humanity is bound up with the belief in spirits, will always fill me with strong repugnance to the hypothesis that Aristotle is speaking. These dictated messages are so remote from Aristotle's writings that they are certainly not from him. The body and the mind make the personality. Not to speak of the body which has been dust these two thousand years, the mind of a human being is known by its imaginations, its hopes, its will, its feelings, its language, and above all its remembrances. If nothing remains of all these, bound together by the consciousness that was himself, I have the right to say that the mind, like the body, has disappeared.

Nevertheless I shall not allow myself to be blinded by rationalism. I admit that there are some very puzzling cases that tend to make one admit the survival of human personality — the cases of Mrs. Piper's George Pelham, of Raymond Lodge, and some others, and in view of the importance of the question, fuller details must be touched upon.

Mrs. Piper's case is the most interesting of all; in the whole record of subjective metapsychics her mediumship is the most remarkable. Her clairvoyance has been studied with more patience and care than has ever previously been given to the matter. Three thick volumes have resulted from that study by the American S. P. R., of which only an abstract is possible in a work like the present which covers the whole ground of metapsychics.1

Mrs. Piper had the good luck to be carefully observed for several years; first by Richard Hodgson and then by J. Hyslop of Boston. Hodgson was anything but credulous. He had been to India to study the strange phenomena attributed to Mme. Blavatsky, and had decided that they were frauds. He also, too hastily, inferred fraud in the Cambridge seances with Eusapia. But Mrs. Piper convinced him of the reality of her metapsychic phenomena. The distinguished psychologist, William James, also convinced of Mrs. Piper's genuine powers, introduced her to his notice.

Those powers are not in doubt; we have given in Chapter III, ante some precise instances of them; but in the present chapter, which deals with personifications only, and not with the proof of cryptesthesia, we shall speak only of the personification of George Pelham in Mrs. Piper.

Was there really an "incarnation" of George Pelham? That

*A partial analysis has been given by Marcel Mangin in the A. S. P., 1898, I. xviii. 228-254, 268-294. The work by Sage may also be referred to. Sir Oliver Lodge has given an excellent analysis which is a model of scientific investigation.

is the question to be answered; not whether cryptesthesia was manifested, of which full proof has already been given.

For a long while Mrs. Piper's guide was Phinuit, that astonishing French doctor from Metz who could speak no French. One day Phinuit announced his approaching departure, and that he would be replaced by another personality. That personality was George Pelham (a pseudonym for Robinson), whose name was barely known to Mrs. Piper. Robinson, on the 7th of March, 1888, had been present at one of Mrs. Pipers seances, but was unconvinced. He died in February, 1892.

Phinuit, in one of his last seances, named George... John Hart's uncle, and suddenly said, "There is another George who wishes to speak to you.,, Forthwith the other George (George Pelham) comes on the scene, gives his name, his Christian name, the names of his intimate friends, and insists that his father and mother should come to converse with him. He asks for the presence of others also; and on following days not only his father and mother but several of his friends obtained numerous and precise details on various conversations that George Pelham had had with them during his lifetime. He said to Mrs. Howard, "Do you still play the violin as badly as ever?', He spoke to Evelyn of a book given to her in which he had written certain words. To Mr. H., a friend of George Pelham's, Mrs. Piper (acting as G. P.), wrote a long letter dealing with very intimate matters, and when Mr. H. had read it, she took it and tore it up.

In thus transmitting the ideas and remembrances of George P., Mrs. Piper both spoke and wrote in his personality. The methods of communication are not now in question; the point is to decide whether it is more rational to infer the survival of George Pelham than to adopt the hypothesis of an extremely developed cryptesthesia. For my own part I consider the latter hypothesis somewhat less improbable than the former; for with Phinuit as her guide, Mrs. Piper had already given decisive proofs of lucidity, though Phinuit had never been a living person.

Since therefore Mrs. Piper had such powers, there is no reason to suppose them absent when George Pelham speaks through her. Why should we believe any other intelligence present than that of Mrs. Piper in a highly lucid state? Why not admit that this lucidity crystallizes, as it were, round the personality of Pelham?

We shall later on examine what objective metapsychics can teach us on the question of personification and survival; but for the present some conclusions can be drawn from subjective data alone.

However surprising the answers of George Pelham may be, the hypothesis of his survival is very frail; for if apart from any hypothesis of survival, we admit, as we are driven to do, that there are faculties of cognition that outrange our usual senses, then it is possible that Mrs. Piper should acquire knowledge of things known to George Pelham and even to him alone. It is easy to admit cryptesthesia, even very far-reaching cryptesthesia: this faculty of the mind is much simpler than survival, for survival implies a number of unlikely and unheard-of facts that clash with admitted physiological truths and are contrary to the logic that warns us that whatever has a beginning must have an end.

The tendency of the human mind to group its remembrances and its notions (whether metapsychic and transcendental or not), around a real or imaginary person, is not a hypothesis; it is a fact. This makes the simple-minded idea that the consciousness of Marie Antoinette or Charles Dickens has returned quite inadmissible in view of the other hypothesis (of cryptesthesia), for this latter rests on two proved propositions:

A. The human mind has mysterious faculties of cognition.

B. These mysterious cognitions have an invincible tendency to group themselves round a new personality.

It might perhaps be more pleasant (I say perhaps, for it is not certain) to suppose that there is no death, that we are destined to survive, and that those who have passed away are near us, listen to us, and protect us; but it is not for us to seek what we may desire as pleasant or convenient. In matters of science, hypothesis for hypothesis, the more simple, the more likely, and the more rational has most claim on our acceptance. The doctrine of survival seems to me to involve so many impossibilities, while that of an intensive cryptesthesia is (relatively) so easy to admit that I do not hesitate at all.

I go so far as to claim — at the risk of being confounded by some new and unforeseen discovery — that subjective metapsychics will always be radically incapable of proving survival. Even if a new case even more astounding than that of George Pelham were to appear, I should prefer to suppose an extreme perfection of transcendental cognitions giving a great multiplicity of notions grouping themselves round the imaginary centre of a faclitious personality, than to suppose that this centre is a real personality— the surviving soul, the will and consciousness of a self that has disappeared, a self which depended on a brain now reduced to dust.

We are, moreover, at the very beginnings of a science that is extremely obscure, so obscure that all affirmations and negations are rash; but the greater the uncertainties the more cautious should be our doctrinal pronouncements, and the bolder our experiments. In experimentation it is impossible to be too bold.

The principal proof of survival, indeed the only proof, is the affirmation of the medium, "I am George Pelham" (after being Phinuit), "and I prove that I am George Pelham because I know all that George Pelham knew." But granting that this is so, the proof is insufficient, for it would be necessary to show that Mrs. Piper's transcendental faculty cannot know what George Pelham knew in his earth-life. This essential proof cannot be given, and that is why I say, provisionally, that subjective metapsychics cannot demonstrate survival.

Spiritualists, when confronted with the poverty of the messages, their use of a language unknown in earth-life, their indifference to, and astonishing ignorance of, matters in which the writers were once passionately interested, say that the defect is in the instrument. "The medium," they say, "is only the instrument that the spirit can but imperfectly control. He finds it difficult to make himself understood and to communicate his thought."

But except in a few rare cases, the inconsistency between the past and the present mentality is so great that in the immense majority of spiritist experiences it is impossible to admit survival, even as a very tentative hypothesis. I could more easily admit a non-human intelligence, distinct from both medium and discarnate, than the mental survival of the latter.

Sir Oliver Lodge has published a remarkable book on survival, which merits special notice both from the interest of the facts themselves and the high scientific authority of the author,1 who has carefully examined those facts. He will pardon me if, while accepting the authenticity of the facts so well observed and analyzed, I come to a different conclusion upon them.

Those facts are as follows: Raymond Lodge was a second

Raymond, or Life and Death, by Sir Oliver Lodge, Methuen, W. London, 1918.

lieutenant in the South Lancashire Regiment, and fell near St. Eloi in Flanders, September 14, 1915. The news of his death reached London September 17, 1915. On the 25th of September,

his mother, Lady Lodge, in a seance with Mrs. Leonard, obtained the name of Raymond and the words, "Tell father I have met some friends of his." The question was put, "Can you give any name?" and the answer was, "Yes, Myers" (Raymond, p. 98).

On the 27th of September Sir Oliver had a seance with Mrs. Leonard. The guide of Mrs. Leonard is a little girl of the name of Feda. Many seances followed, some with Mrs. Leonard, some with Mr. Vout Peters, some with other mediums, those who took part in them being sometimes Sir Oliver, sometimes Lady Lodge, sometimes Raymond's brothers and sisters.

A characteristic fact announced by the mediums was that there was in existence a photographic group of officers in which Raymond appeared. No one in London suspected the existence of this photograph. Many precise details were given before its arrival in England, more especially the very unusual fact in such groups that one of the officers behind Raymond has his hand on Raymond's shoulder, Raymond being seated on the ground. This episode of the photograph is one of the best instances of cryptesthesia ever recorded. The succession of the facts is as follows:

July 20, 1915, expiry of Raymond's last leave.

August 24, 1915, the photograph taken at the front. Raymond's diary mentions this, but he did not write about it to hi« parents.

September 14th, Raymond's death.

September 27th, Vout Peters announces that there is a photograph.

October 15, 1915, Captain B. sends the negative to Aldershot to be developed.

November 25, 1915, Mrs. Cheves (a stranger to the Lodge family) writes to say that she has a photograph of the officers of the South Lancashire Regiment and offers to send it.

December 3, 1915, Mrs. Leonard in seance gives a complete description of this photograph.

December 6, 1915, Lady Lodge finds in Raymond's diary a note stating that the photograph was taken August 24th.

December 7th (morning) Sir Oliver writes to Mr. Hill his idea of what the photograph should show. This letter was prior to the arrival of the group.

December 7th, the photograph reaches Mariemont (Sir Oliver's residence). In other seances, Raymond, speaking through Mrs. Leonard and conversing with Feda, gives a number of small but very significant facts that Mrs. Leonard could not know: the name of one of his comrades, Mitchell, an officer of the Flying Corps; the names of Raymond's two sisters; the song My Orange Girl that Raymond liked to sing; and a vague indication on the death of an old servant of the family. The episode of "Mr. Jackson" is curious. Feda says that Raymond speaks often of Mr. Jackson, and mixes up his name with a bird and a pedestal; and Raymond seems much amused and makes jokes on Jackson, the bird, and the pedestal.

Now "Mr. Jackson" was the name that Raymond and the other children gave to a peacock. It had died some time previously, had been stuffed, and put on a pedestal.

In some cross-correspondences simultaneous at Edgbaston and London, the word "Honolulu" was specifically mentioned at both places. To estimate the value of the whole mass of proofs it is obviously necessary to refer to the book itself, of which only these very scant indications can be given here. From the whole of the evidence Sir Oliver Lodge concludes that Raymond survives. This inference has been fully discussed and rejected on consideration of equally valid facts in the case of George Pelham.

Many examples have now been adduced that establish incontestably that lucidity, cryptesthesia, and telepathy exist; that is, that by some channel which we do not understand, real facts are made known; but that does not prove that the big consciousness of Raymond has survived.

If we accept the two facts — that some mediums are aware of things that normal channels cannot convey — and that they tend to group both normal and supernormal knowledge round real or imaginary personalities, tTiat amply suffices to explain everything.

Mrs. Leonard and Mr. Vout Peters have perceived certain details relating to Raymond; forthwith their subconsciousness has invented the personality of Raymond — imaginary in the sense that Raymond no longer exists, real in the sense that round this auto-suggestion they have grouped many actual facts that their normal senses could not have supplied.

For, finally, if Raymond were really speaking by the intermediary of Feda, why should he be so reticent of proofs? Why, in such messages, are there so many obscure and symbolical allusions (like those relating to Faunus and Myers) and why so many words? Why so few names, dates, and precise remembrances? Cryptesthesia is always partial, defective, symbolical, and so mixed with errors and puerilities that it is difficult to believe that the consciousness of a deceased person can be limited to such a degree, when more cogent witness would be required to enable us to affirm scientifically a belief in immortality.

Mrs. Leonard says that Raymond has the hand of a comrade on his shoulder. No one in London knows this — it is incontestable lucidity, but I cannot conclude that Raymond himself gives this detail. It is simpler to refer it to lucidity only, the rather as she has given proofs of lucidity in cases where the intervention of a deceased person cannot be invoked. Very probably if the gallant Raymond had not been killed, Mrs. Leonard could have equally well received knowledge of the photograph, for she has on several occasions shown that she knows things by supernormal means.

Alas, no! survival is not to be proved thus; and despite the genius of its author, and his noble faith in the future life, this able book has not supplied the decisive data. If it were incumbent on me to formulate a conclusion, the very fragmentary, symbolical, and uncertain nature of these messages that claim to be from surviving minds, and their astonishing lack of precise detail, would lead me to infer that there is no survival of consciousness. This inference is made with deep regret, for it costs me much to separate myself from Myers and Lodge who have my entire confidence and admiration.

Moreover, in the very midst of my negation, I feel it incumbent to make full reservations; we are only at the dawn of metapsychic science and all absolute negation should be ruled out.

In fine, there are three possible hypotheses: (a) Everything comes from the mind of the medium; (b) the mind of a deceased person intervenes; (c) a non-human intelligence is concerned, an angel, a demon, or some other power.

On subjective data alone, the first hypothesis is certainly the most likely, since the admission that the human mind has mysterious powers of cognition covers the ground; the second seems hardly admissible because it is in complete disaccord with all physiology and implies innumerable psychological improbabilities; and the third is absolutely useless from the point of view of subjective metapsychics taken alone, and there is no real reason for putting it forward.

Later on we shall see whether the study of objective metapsychics leads to a modification of this preliminary opinion.

A large number of so-called spirit identifications have been published in spiritualist journals, notably in the Banner of Light. Mr. J. Burns, editor of The Medium and Daybreak, has collected many from J. Morse's mediumship.

Unfortunately these cannot be used to any effect, either for identification or to prove cryptesthesia, for the good faith of the medium, which I should be disposed to accept, proves absolutely nothing.

Pantomnesia1 accounts for Mr. Morse being able to write, "I am Thomas Waller, I lived at Chirfton Road, Manchester. I died in May of this year aged over sixty." For this to be evidential, rigorous proof is needed that neither consciously nor subconsciously could the medium possibly have known the facts alleged. Even if this difficult and almost impossible proof could be given, the inference might be that cryptesthesia and not the surviving consciousness of Thomas Waller was the origin of the message.

The case of Abraham Florentine has been cited as a proof of survival (Barrett, loc. cit., p. 208). It proves cryptesthesia but not survival. In August, 1874, Stainton Moses received a message from one Abraham Florentine, an old soldier of 1812, who had died at Brooklyn, aged 83 years, 1 month, and 17 days. After much research it was discovered that an old soldier of 1812 had actually died at Brooklyn at that precise age. No American or English newspaper had mentioned the fact, so that it could only have reached Stainton Moses by supernormal means.

It seems to me rash and unscientific to assume that survival is the one and only explanation of facts that had reached Stainton Moses by cryptesthesia. Several other hypotheses are possible, improbable indeed, but less wildly improbable than the return of Abraham Florentine to animate the hand of Stainton Moses.

If we allow to cryptesthesia its full force, it will be seen to extend to all facts, however distant, and however trivial they may seem. The facts are there to establish that cryptesthesia exists, even when no death is in question. It is therefore unnecessary to suppose survival of the dead since other instances are known in which such facts are revealed by this faculty without any corresponding death. As in the cases of George Pelham and

degression of memory: the imagination that a thing experienced has been "seen before." — Translator's note.

Raymond Lodge, the case of Abraham Florentine gives no ground for the inference of survival. It is excellent clairvoyance, but there is no need to go further.

Another inconclusive case is reported by Bozzano. In a spiritist circle at Nancy, the spirit of Cauchy, who died in 1855, dictates the Latin phrase which appears, so it seems, on his tomb in the cemetery at Sceaux: Beatus qui intelligit super egenum et pauperem. It is proved that the inscription is really there, and that it was covered with lichens that had to be removed before the letters could be read. But what a number of things need to be proved: (1) That no word or writing could have acquainted the medium with the fact, consciously or otherwise; (2) that the inscription was absolutely illegible one, two, or ten years previously; (3) that no book or biography of Cauchy ■ mentioned the epitaph.

I do not fear once more to emphasize that cryptesthesia should not be admitted for any fact until every other possible normal explanation has been exhausted.

A certain number of cases have been collected by Bozzano (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 267-268).

It is probable that most of these give some evidence of cryptesthetic power, but they are often only pantomnesic illusions. In any case they prove nothing as to survival of human consciousness; and notwithstanding their interest it is unnecessary to mention them here. Perhaps the day will come when they will find that explanation, but provisionally we shall not adopt the hypothesis of survival, as yet quite undemonstrated and perhaps undemonstrable. I will, however, cite the following very moving incident which has only recently been published, though it occurred in 1904.

The guide of the medium was his father, Luigi. On that day Luigi seemed terrified and declared that bad spirits were near the medium. Suddenly L. D., the medium, glaring round, rushed upon a certain X., who was present. He foamed with rage, and tried to throttle X., crying out, "I have found you at last, wretch! I was a soldier of the royal marines. Do you remember Oporto... you murdered me, and I will avenge myself and strangle you.,, His violence was such that the unfortunate X. was nearly suffocated, and was hardly liberated by the united efforts of four of the onlookers.

X. had been an officer in the navy and had long since retired.

He left the navy under tragic circumstances. (It would be interesting to know whether, as seems probable, the facts were known to those present; as to which Bozzano does not enlighten us.) Some years previously X. was with his ship at Oporto. Passing along a side street he heard some rowdy Italians singing in a pothouse. He entered and found some half-drunken sailors, one of whom abused him. He drew his sword and killed the aggressor. For this he was condemned to six years' detention in a fortress and invited to send in his resignation. Did the medium know this terrible story? Even if he did not, cryptesthesia might have revealed it, and then the reconstruction of the scene is explicable by that alone, more easily than by the return of the soldier murdered at Oporto.

Myers took the greatest possible interest in the problem of survival; he believed and hoped it to be true. He proposed to certain of his friends of the S. P. R. to write certain facts known to them only, in a sealed letter, to be opened when a medium supposed to be in communication with his spirit should have claimed to have read the contents of the sealed letter. The result of this experiment was negative, as Sir Oliver Lodge has testified. The alleged promise of R. Hodgson to return also came to nothing (A. S. P., 1906, 124 and 392).

Montaigne, in his Essays (II, vi, edit. Amsterdam, 1659, 571), recalls the promise of Canius Julius, going to execution: "I holde myselfe readdie to percyve if in this briefe moment of dethe I may knowe somewhat of ye departure of ye Soule and if shee shd feele wrathe at her separation, for that if I learne aught thereon I may warne my frends if it be so permytted." But Canius Julius did not return. (I transcribe the old French into old English. — Translator.)

Is it necessary to speak of Gaston Cremieux, shot at Marseilles in 1871? In prison before his execution he declared himself a believer in the immortality of the soul and promised his friends, of whom Clovis Hugues was one, to return. At the moment when he was shot, Clovis Hugues, who knew nothing of the death of his friend, heard in his cell distinct raps that seemed directed intelligently.

Mr. Happerfield had promised his old friend, John Harford, when the latter was on his death-bed, to look after his widow; and he took measures to place her beyond want, confiding her interests to one of his nephews. Long after, one morning towards dawn Mr. Happerfield saw the apparition of his friend, who said, "You have not kept your promise, my wife is unhappy." Mr. Happerfield, though not alarmed, woke his wife and instituted enquiries. Mrs. Harford was living in great indigence.

It seems unnecessary to see in this incident anything but the vague remorse of Mr. Happerfield taking a symbolical form.

Many times two friends or married couples have promised that the first to die would manifest to the survivor; but the rare cases in which the promise has been kept belong to the well-attested instances of cryptesthetic monitions.

Finally, I will make a remark, perhaps hitherto not put forward, against the identification of metapsychic forces with the defunct: Those who return are mostly well-known and distinguished persons. Why do not mediums present everyday and obscure persons? If consciousness persists it must persist equally for the many as for the few; and the obscure are a hundred thousand times more numerous than the distinguished; but the incarnations are of fanciful personalities like Rector, Imperator, John King, Phinuit, Katie King, or of notabilities.

In conclusion, it would be rash to deny survival, but a thousand times more rash to affirm it. This negation of survival in no way implies the negation of cryptesthesia; the two propositions must be entirely dissociated. The extraordinary, supernormal faculty of cognition is a fact; the survival of human consciousness is a hypothesis.1



8. Xenoglossis

The speaking of strange tongues must be included among the phenomena of cryptesthesia. It is the understanding, reading, writing, and pronunciation of a language that has not been learned. I call it "xenoglossis. " There are cases of this, which, though not admitting of a definite inference, are disturbing. Such cases are cited by C. de Vesme (A. S. P., 1885, xv, 319).

In the first place we cannot apply this name to the imaginary languages created by mediums.

1Even Aksakoff, in despite of his robust faith in a future life, says: "Absolute proof of spirit-identity is impossible to obtain; we must be contented with relative proof." In plain French, a relative proof means a hypoth-

The most celebrated case of the kind is the Martian language of Helen Smith, so carefully analyzed by Flournoy. He demonstrated rigorously that this new language was modified French. This new tongue shows an astounding memory and stupefying powers of invention. Helen Smith in six months was able to speak fluently in a tongue of her own invention. Flournoy having advanced some objection she changed her Martian language and made it ultra-Martian. Wonderful!

Inspired by Helen Smith's Martian novel, Mrs. Smead in America invented yet another Martian tongue (Hyslop, A. S. P.,

1906, 461). These creations illustrate the fertility of the subconscious. They have nothing to do with cryptesthesia. True xenoglossis consists in speaking in an existing language which is unknown to the medium.

The most striking instance is that of Laura Edmunds, the daughter of Judge Edmunds, president of the Senate and judge of the Supreme Court of New York, a man of high intelligence and unimpeachable rectitude. Laura, a fervent Catholic and very pious, spoke only English. She had learned at school some words of French, but that was all she knew of foreign tongues. One day, in 1859, Mr. Edmunds received a visit from Mr. Evangelides, who conversed in modern Greek with Laura Edmunds.

In the course of this conversation, at which several persons were present, Mr. Evangelides was moved to tears, for Laura informed him of the death of his son in Greece. She incarnated, it would seem, an intimate friend of his, Mr. Botzaris, who had died in Greece. If Edmunds is to be believed, Laura spoke in modern Greek and knew of the death of Evangelides's son by the intermediary of Botzaris. The announcement of death was correct.

Judge Edmunds adds, "To deny the fact is impossible, it was too well known; I could as well deny the light of the sun. Nor could I think it an illusion, for it is in no way different from any other reality. It took place before eight or ten educated and intelligent persons. We had never seen Mr. Evangelides; he was introduced by a friend that same evening. How could Laura tell him of the death of his son? How could she understand and speak Greek, which she had never previously heard?" 1

1De Vesme, Xenoglossie, L'tcriture automatique en langues itrangeres, A. S. P., 1 90s, xv, 317-353. La xenoglossie de Miss Laura Edmunds, A. S. P.,

1907, xvii, 603.

Judge Edmunds also records the xenoglossis of Mrs. Young of Chicago who, under control of German spirits, spoke and sang in German to a circle in which no one knew that language. Says Mr. Young, "I begged Mr. Euler, a German medium, to come. He came twice, and conversed with the medium for over an hour at each visit. On other occasions Mrs. Young spoke in Spanish and Italian. She was a working woman who had only been to a primary school."

I have myself observed a curious case, difficult to interpret, nearly related to xenoglossis. Briefly it is as follows:

Mrs. X., a young woman of about thirty, had never learned Greek, and it is absolutely certain that she did not know it. Nevertheless in my presence she wrote long sentences in Greek, with some errors that clearly show mental vision of one or more Greek books. After much research, aided by chance more than by my own penetration, and thanks to my friends, M. Courtier and Dr. Vlavianos, of Athens, I was able to discover the book from which Mrs. X. had drawn most of the long Greek sentences that she had written in my presence. The book is not to be found in Paris except in the National Library — the Greco-French and Franco-Greek dictionary by Byzantios and Coromelas. As it is a dictionary of modern Greek, it is not in use in any school.

Mrs. X. wrote before me some twenty lines of Greek with about eight per cent, of small errors such as would be made in transcribing Greek without understanding it. Thus instead of gtoXtjkt/uovs, Mrs. X. writes gtoXicf^oS?; instead of opiiXovs, d/xi\ovS; instead of kvnapodcpj evnap Sep; instead of tuupdv, fjnupov} all of them mistakes that indicate a visual copy by some one who does not know Greek and makes the errors consequent on imperfect visualization. I am absolutely certain that in writing those lines Mrs. X. had no text before her eyes; she was looking into space as if she were copying from the text of a language unknown to her of which she saw the characters without knowing their meaning. Although she certainly did not understand the phrases it is remarkable that they fitted the circumstances well enough. One evening at sunset, she wrote a Greek phrase from the dictionary above-mentioned: AvareWovroS Koti dvovros rov tjXiov rf OKia eKteivarai /uaicpav. When the sun is at its rising or setting shadows are thrown far. There is a slight error; eKteivarai for eKteiverai.

There are but two solutions — either fraud, aided by an unheardof visual memory, or the hypothesis of extraordinary cryptesthesia. Possible fraud must always be reckoned with. Let us suppose this in despite of the psychological improbabilities; let us admit (1) that Mrs. X. bought secretly Byzantios's dictionary, the Apology of Socrates, Plato's Phcedra, and the Gospel of St. John, the four books from which the extracts came; (2) that she meditated over these to fix in her mind the visual image of letters whose sense she did not understand.

Both hypotheses are admissible if we suppose long and elaborate preparation, which is, after all, possible. But it is singular that Mrs. X., who knows no Greek at all and could not understand the sentences, should have retained so clear a visual image as to be able to reproduce from memory six hundred and twenty-two letters with six per cent, of errors. It is not exactly a case of xenoglossis, for she neither spoke nor understood Greek. She wrote long sentences from mental vision; how did she get this vision? This is very different from speaking in a strange tongue, and to explain this strange case we must admit either cryptesthesia or a prodigious visual memory that can nowhere be paralleled.

Here and there other instances of xenoglossis are to be found:

The young daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Brown of Melbourne, aged eleven, wrote automatically some Chinese characters, holding her pen in the Chinese manner. It appears that this message is badly written but is partly legible. Now Chinese writing is extremely difficult as everyone knows. But even if the fact were correctly observed, what is to be inferred from it?1

A very striking case is adduced by M. Chedo Miyatovitch, a Serbian diplomat. He went with a Croatian friend, a M. Hinkovitch, a lawyer of Agram, to consult Mrs. Wriedt, an American medium (professional), in London. An old Croat doctor controlled her, spoke in Croat to M. Hinkovitch, and conversed for some time in that language. Another time Mrs. Wriedt spoke in Serbian in the name of M. Miyatovitch's mother. On another

1A discussion on this was held by the S. P. R. (/. 5*. P. R., June, 1906, 276). Sir William Crookes who presided thought that the writing was done "in a visionary manner, copied from their visionary prototypes." There are some interesting remarks by Mrs. Verrall, Sir Oliver Lodge, Mr. Piddington, and Mr. F. C. Constable on the subject, and the very fair criticisms of M. Dessoir, Vom Jenseits der Seele, 4th edit., Enfle, 1920, 97"Ioo» should also be read.

occasion, Mme. Selenka, a German, being present, her deceased husband, through Mrs. Wriedt, sang a German song.

Some aspersions have been cast on the authenticity of Mrs. Wriedt's mediumship to which Sir William Barrett has replied emphatically. In any case it is difficult to suppose that she can normally speak fluent Serbian and Croat.

Eglinton, who knew no German, has given messages in German by direct writing. In a seance in which Mr. Gladstone, the illustrious statesman, took part, there were answers by direct writing in Spanish, in French, and in Greek. Eglinton knew not one word of Spanish or Greek, and very little French; but Eglinton's sincerity is doubtful (Erny, loc. ext., 57). Mrs. Thompson was able, in hypno-spiritist trance, to speak in Dutch to Dr. van Eeden, though absolutely ignorant of that language. Mr. Damiani, in a report to the Dialectical Society of London, states that he received in Sicily many communications in German, French, Latin, and English through an uneducated medium of the working class.

Mr. Burns, in a report to the same society, states that he has seen his sister-in-law, Mary Burns, write messages in languages that she had no knowledge of.

In the Revue Spirite (January 15, 1886), M. Didelot, a schoolmaster, gives an account of an experiment by the canon of the cathedral at Nancy, assisted by some venerable priests of the diocese, on a young boy who was the medium observed by M. Didelot. An answer was given in Latin to questions put by the priests enclosed in a sealed envelope placed on the table.

Some facts of very transitory xenoglossis have been observed by Dr. Cadello of Palermo.1

Minfa Filituto, a young girl of Palermo, aged sixteen, fell into spontaneous somnambulism in 1849. In one of these attacks she claimed to be a Greek, and wrote Italian sentences with Greek letters. She did not know Greek, but a Greek grammar had been lent to her. On the next day she spoke fluent French, a language of which she knew scarcely anything. On the third day, though she had never learned a word of English and no one had ever spoken English in her presence (?) Dr. Cadello testifies that she conducted a long conversation with two English gentlemen in their own tongue. On these three days she seemed to have completely forgotten her mother tongue. On the fourth day

xStoria di un caso d'isterimo con segnasione spontina, Palermo, 1853, Analysis by Hahn, in A. S. P., 1901, 149-159.

she spoke Italian, which, being a Sicilian, she knows but imperfectly and never speaks. On the fifth day, the attack having come to an end, she resumed her Sicilian speech and completely forgot the episodes of her xenoglossis.

What are we to think of the story related by Dr. Grand Boulogne? A lady who knew no Latin wrote automatically with unexampled speed, "Sacerdos a deo dilecte, cur manifesta negas? Cur concedens omnia potenti Deo non fateris veritatem, oculorum aciem perstringentem. Sacrae litterae memento, crebrae sunt manifestationes angelis. Vide et crede." The style is surprisingly bad ecclesiastical Latin, which is all the more curious. But to carry conviction, more must be known of the conditions of the case, and above all the incident should have been repeated. Dr. Grand Boulogne remarks that during this writing, blows were struck on the table and the ceiling (cited by Delanne, Recherches sur la mediumnite, p. 420).

Dr. Bohm1 observed a person who wrote with chalk on a blackboard answers to questions put to her. She wrote in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, being ignorant of all three; but the account of the experiments is too imperfect to allow of any inferences.

Aksakoff (Animisme et Spiritisme, p. 618, French version) quotes the case of the Rev. Shirman, who had lived in certain islands in the Pacific and in some seances with Mrs. Allams, a professional medium of Providence (Rhode Island), saw the form of a native woman of the Marquesas Islands who spoke in her mother tongue. But this case was very probably fraudulent, for the phenomenon only occurred after Mrs. Allams had known Mr. Shirman for six months.

Mme. d'Esperance knew no Greek, but when she gave a materialization, there appeared the form of a woman of rare beauty who called herself Nepenthes. Nepenthes wrote in classic Greek in Professor L.'s notebook: "I am Nepenthes, thy friend. When thy soul is oppressed by overmuch pain, call on me, Nepenthes, and I will speedily come to assuage thy trouble/' 2

Certain cases of pseudo-xenoglossis must be severely criticized. Gibier (Delanne, Apparitions materiaUsees, ii, 505) cites the case of Mme. Salmon who spoke no French, but said without

xVber wissenchaftlich durchfiihrte Versuche und Gedankenlesen (Psych. Studien, 1917, xliv, 575).

2Cited by Bozzano, A. S. P., 19 10, 9. The case of Nepenthes is interesting, but experiences with Mme. d'Esperance must be taken with great reserve.

any foreign accent, "Ma tante, ma tante, je suis si heureuse de vous voir." It would be easy to learn these words and to repeat them with a pure pronunciation. Mrs. Salmon is a professional medium of questionable honesty.

I note passim the stories of the exorcists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries with cases of "possession" at Loudun and elsewhere. The "devils" who deceived these poor hysterics answered the exorcists in fluent Latin; but how much are we to put down to error and illusion? Cases in which children who did not know their letters have written messages, must be classed under xenoglossis. They are rare, but Bozzano reports several and quotes others from Aksakoff (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 10).

Myers and Hodgson saw the words "Your Aunt Emma" which had been written by a little girl of four who did not know a single letter of the alphabet. Drs. Dusart and Ch. Broquet gave pencil and paper to a child of three and a half, Celina, who though quite ignorant of letters, wrote, "I am glad to manifest through a charming little medium of three-and-a-half who promises well. Promise me not to neglect her." But one can deduce nothing from these isolated facts. Dr. Quintard stated to the Medical Society of Angers in 1894 the curious case of a child of seven, who not only made intricate arithmetical calculations, but also guessed his mother's thoughts. Perhaps sufficient care was not taken to avoid all collusion, conscious or unconscious, between mother and child. The precocity of the child is remarkable, but other similar cases are known (Delanne, Recherches qu. supra, Paris, 1902, 206).

I cannot consider as metapsychic the cases of musical precocity reported by Mr. Gower and attributed by him to some mysterious power, for the child in question was eleven years old (Eric Rorngold). Mr. Gower cites also the case of Blanche Cobacker, aged twelve, who plays and composes marvellously. At eleven and twelve everything is explicable by abnormally rapid development.1

Dr. Urysz reports the case of a peasant girl of fourteen who could hardly read, who wrote for him as if she were one of the patients he had attended at Lemberg six years before, "Thank

V. S. P. R., igi 3, 56. Pepito Arriola was a skilful musician at the age of three years and three months, but neither I nor anyone else imagined the intervention of a spirit to explain this marvellous precocity. I note here, without drawing any inference, that Mr. Gower saw Pepito in 1911, the same Pepito who in 1900 was already a real artist, and that Mr. Gower found to Pepito's great surprise that the boy had the gift of automatic writing.

you for the injection made on my death-bed, November 18, 1900. Caroline C."

It is possible, though unlikely, that the child, then eight years old, may have known Caroline C. (?). Caroline lived at Lemberg, and the child at Bralyhanen. The child's writing in her normal state was rude and infantile, but the message was absolutely in the handwriting of Caroline C.; it was, moreover, by direct writing (?)< This singular story is questionable at all points.

To sum up: None of these facts, whether of xenoglossis or of automatic writing by children and unlettered persons, carries sufficient weight of proof. We cannot, therefore, grant them full rights of citizenship in the extensive kingdom of subjective metapsychics. I am inclined to think that some day, perhaps soon, some may be admitted as authentic. Meanwhile, however, better instances must be sought and they must be presented in a less fragmentary and imperfect manner than those known hitherto. For the present we must limit ourselves to the facts which are proved and established by thousands of cases, considering the rare and curious phenomena of xenoglossis as milestones on the road of progress to that fuller metapsychic science which cannot as yet be written.



Chapter IV. The Divining-Rod

The curious facts relating to the divining-rod seem at the first glance to have no connection with metapsychics; but it will soon be apparent that these phenomena, long known and now well proven, suggest some interesting hypotheses on cryptesthesia, warrant certain analogies, and throw some light on the unknown forces that actuate the subconsciousness.



1. Historical

The use of the divining-rod1 is of high antiquity.

When certain sensitives hold in their fingers a flexible hazel rod without moving it intentionally, it seems that under certain conditions the rod bends, of itself as it were. It turns very strongly in the hands of the holder, and, as it would seem, independently of the will of the operator.

When such persons walk over ground that covers unknown water-springs the rod turns abruptly and with great force. This fact has long been used to discover sources of water, and the diviners have hence been called sourciers in French. M. Mager proposed the name baguettisants (1908). In English they are called "dowsers."

In 1854, after M. Riondel's monograph on the discovery of springs, the Paris Academy of Sciences appointed a commission to examine the subject. The celebrated chemist Chevreul

important monographs have been published on the subject; there is even one devoted to its bibliography alone. There is much useful matter in Henri Mager's Les Baguettes des Sourciers et les forces de la Nature, Paris, Dunod, 1920. Special mention should be made of the first work of a scientific nature on the subject, La Physique occulte ou trait i de la baguette divinatoire by the Abbe de Vallemont, Paris, 1693. See also the work of Chevreul, 1854, and J. Maxwell on the same {A. S. P., 1904, xiv, 276-290, and 337-358); and especially the excellent work of Sir William Barrett, On the so-called divining-rod, P. S. P. R., xiii and xiv. The bibliography of C. v. Kling Kowstroem, Bibliographic der Wunschelruthe (Shonhuth, Munich, 191 1).

was entrusted with the report of the commission. This report was not presented to the Academy, but was published as an independent book. It only averred that the movement of the rod is not produced by physical forces but by the hands and muscles of the dowser.

M. Chevreul, in fact, returned to the ideas that he had enunciated in 1833 on subconscious movements as causing the movements of the "magic pendulum. "

This is an instrument long used for divination, consisting of a weight hung from a thread. The upper end of the thread is held in the hand, and the movements of the weight (often a ring) give the indications. Sometimes it is suspended at the centre of a circle on which are inscribed the letters of the alphabet; the ring then moves to the letters, thus spelling out a word or a phrase. There is no need to insist on the fact that the answers are due to the subconscious movements of the person holding the thread. These are involuntary, but are, nevertheless, actuated by intelligence. The phenomenon is essentially the same as automatic writing, conversations by planchette, the "willing game," and other analogous facts well known today; that is, involuntary and unconscious muscular movements organizing themselves by some kind of synthesis. This subconscious synthesis is sometimes so coherent as to lead to the hypothesis of the intervention of a new personality.

It is easy to make the following very instructive experiment with a young, simple-minded boy: The pendulum is put into his hand and he is told that it will indicate his age. Supposing this to be twelve years, the pendulum will strike twelve times on a screen placed near it; and the boy will be amazed, and will say, "I stayed quite still." Now, he did not stay quite still, and it was really himself that struck the twelve strokes, but he did not will to do this and was not aware of his own movements. He could equally well have dictated a sentence by movements of the ring to an alphabet; his subconsciousness after having thought of the phrase would have translated it by almost imperceptible muscular movements towards the letters.

These facts are now undisputed. To Chevreul belongs the merit of being the first to indicate their principle.1 According to him, and to Babinet, and to Barrett, and to most of the authors

JH. Mager, loc. cit., Paul Lemoine, Quelques observations sur la baguette divinatoire {Bull, de la Soc. Philomathique de Paris), 191 3, v, 10, 17.

who have studied the question, the movements of the diviningrod are determined solely by involuntary muscular contractions of the dowser.

Thus regarded the question seems very simple, but this sim-

The bending of the rod over water-springs or metals is incontestably true. It has recently been fully verified, with all possible care, and the phenomenon can no more be denied than any fact of chemistry or physiology. I will quote only the more recent experiments, those of M. Paul Lemoine made at Toulouse in the chemical laboratory of the Catholic Institute. The Abbe Caubin, a very experienced dowser, was able to reveal the presence of divers metallic masses. The kind of rod used has some influence on the result. With a wooden rod there were eight successes out of eight trials; with a copper rod four successes in seven trials; iron gave two in four; and glass none in five trials.

The following experiments are very interesting: different weights of gold induced movements of the rod at distances greater or less according to the greater or less weight of the metal. The Abbe Caubin knew the amount of metal placed for trial, but M. Lemoine convinced himself that voluntary movements by the operator did not enter into the matter. Further trials resulted in the figures below:

There was a series of trials, published in 1913 by H. Mager, at the Forest of Vincennes at which it was clearly proved that masses of metals buried in the ground could be discovered equally well as moving water. The discovery of moving underground water has almost become a trade and cannot be doubted: the government engineers in different lands use the faculty of dowsers to discover water; this is done in various districts of

plicity is only in seeming.



2. Summary of the Facts

Mass of gold (grams t).

Distance at which the rod began to turn (metres).

3

16 32 48 64 90

1.70 2.20 2.70 3.30 4.00 4.60

France, in Tunisia, Algiers, the United States, and in German Africa. Differences of skill in dowsers are not due to the rod not turning in their hands, but to unequal ability in interpreting its movements as to the extent, depth, and direction of the flow.

Although the history of the divining-rod is only indirectly connected with metapsychics, the fact itself is of such import that the recent works proving it must be mentioned here.1

To A. Martel, who was quite sceptical, Vire indicated exactly (underlined by Martel) on the surface of the ground, for more than a thousand yards, the course of a subterranean stream. It matters little that he knew the country, for the surface gives no indication of an underground flow. Martel also gives the successes obtained in German Africa.

Summing up his results, M. Vire has sent me an unpublished note in which he gives the figures below from fully verified trials since 1913 by Messrs. Pelaprat, Probst, Jouff reau, A. Vire, Colonel Vallantin, and the Abbe Mermet:

Number of

Percentage of

Experiments.

Successes.

19

89

Subterranean cavities

23

87

11

80

9

55

Calculation by percentages underrates the successes, for a remarkable positive result greatly outweighs many failures. The probability is not 1 to 2, but very much less.

For instance, M. Pelaprat and M. Vire (in an unpublished experiment) showed Mr. A. C, councillor of state, where to sink a well on his property at Juillac (Depart. Lot). Several borings had been made without results. Messrs. Pelaprat and Vire indicated a thin stream of water thirteen metres below the

*I give prominence to the work of M. Armand Vire, D. es-Sc., president of Archaeological Society, who is a skilful dowser, Bulletin d'histoire naturelle, and Oomptes rendus de VAcademie des Sciences, December 22, 19 13, clvii, 1460. See also E. A. Martel, Traite des Eaux souterraines, Paris, Doin, 1921, 740-752, and P. Landesque, Hydrologie et Hydroscopic, Paris, Dunod, 1920.

1. See Verband zur Klarung der Wiinschelruthfrage, Stuttgart, 1912.

2. Besides the monograph by Barrett, see Sanitary Record, May 2, 191 3.

3. The analysis of the work of the Congress of Halle has been given by E. Noel in the journal VEau (November 15, 191 3)- V. Das Wasser (Leipzig, 1913). M. Argner is the editor of a review devoted solely to this subject, Die Wiinschelruthe, Leipzig (1 909-1921).

surface: a well was sunk, and the water was found in sufficient quantity for the purposes required.

English results agree with those of French and German dowsers.

M. Landesque, of the French Government Engineering School (Ponts et Chaussees) gives an account of his experiences in Tunisia, in a very interesting book from which I will cite only the following characteristic incident: The military post at Ramsa had a well outside the camp. M. Landesque indicated a spring within the camp at a depth of six metres. The boring was made but no water found. M. Landesque advised to go a little deeper and one metre farther down the spring was discovered.

These facts are very important, and M. Martel on an impartial summary of all opinions concludes in favour of a rhabdic force, and adds that additional experiments are desirable; in which I concur, not to establish the undeniable facts, but to throw light on the conditions under which they occur. The interesting fact, verified by many experiments, is that the rod turns in the hands of the dowser when over subterranean water; and this fact is pregnant with many important theoretical inferences.

In one experiment (Mager, loc. cit., 24), two dowsers, Falcoz and Probst, recognized metal plates wrapped in paper. Five different metals were used. Both dowsers agreed in naming the metals correctly. Therefore on ten experiments each having a probability of 1: 5 there were ten successes, which gives the certitude of (%)10. But since the fact is established there is no more need to calculate chances than to do so to establish the deflection of the magnetic needle by an electric current.

That some persons still hesitate over the matter is due to a wish to use the divining-rod as a measuring instrument. It is desired to use it for industrial purposes, and then the depth and direction of flow are important matters. This knowledge varies with the skill of the dowser; but we are not here concerned with the exactitude of the revelations by the rod, but only whether there is an emanation, or as I propose to call it, "a rhabdic force" acting on the nervo-muscular system of the man and through him on the rod.

It seems to me that this cannot be in doubt (Marage, Revue Scientifique, February 14, 1920); but is the problem one of physics or of metapsychics?

By our definition of metapsychics the movement of the rod would seem to be excluded from that science, since there cannot be any question here of intelligent forces setting human sensitiveness into action. Nevertheless, the history of the diviningrod is pertinent to our subject. For, if natural forces (underground water and metals) exercise an unknown action upon the subconscious mind, there must be unknown vibrations that awaken cryptesthetic sensibility; and we are brought back to the metapsychic that deals with the unknown vibrations of things.

Is the bending of the rod due to unconscious muscular action of the dowser, or is it a direct action of some physical force upon the rod?

The hypotheses of trickery, chance, and conscious muscular action can be at once dismissed. Dowsers discover water-springs neither by chance nor by fraud; the rod turns strongly in their hands in spite of themselves, so to say, giving indications by the direction and strength of the movement as to the direction and depth of the subterranean stream; though the indications are very difficult to interpret correctly. There are therefore but two hypotheses:

A. The movement of the rod is due to unconscious muscular contractions.

B. They are independent of these muscular contractions. The first of these is very simple, and doubtless the only one to

be generally accepted, as it is by Chevreul and Barrett. The unknown physical force (rhabdic force) influences the subconsciousness of the dowser and induces muscular contractions. But certain difficulties are involved.

The movements of the hazel rod are sometimes strong enough to break it, the parts of the rod held in the hands of the dowser not moving at all when the middle part bends. P. Lemoine placed each end in a sheath held in the hands. The rod turns in the sheath, as shown in Paul Lemoine's woodcut.

Despite the exactitude of this observation we cannot admit that there is no muscular action. How can we suppose that the rod is influenced physically and directly by water, metals, or metallic salts? Is it possible that it should move by itself whilst the muscles of the hands are inert? If this were so the dowser would not be required, a mere physical instrument to show the angular displacement would suffice. But under such conditions the rods do not move at all. The presence of the dowser is required and his personality is the necessary and preponderant condition.

H. Mager is inclined to think that using proper means everyone might be a dowser; but he gives no proof of this. The positive and undeniable fact is that in the hands of some persons the rod turns very forcibly, while with others it does not turn at all. Mager constructed a galvanometric instrument for the same purpose which has not as yet succeeded, but would seem to be actuated by the potential of electric forces that accompany moving subterranean water, without the presence of a dowser. But these small variations of the magnetic needle are not to be compared with the powerful bending of the hazel rods. The action of a stream of water on a galvanometer is a matter of pure physics on which it is needless to insist. If there is any such action it is extremely feeble, and it seems impossible to attribute the powerful flexion of the hazel rod to these minute electrical reactions.

There is much more also that is very obscure. Rods of different kinds are not equally suitable, which would seem to indicate some physical action on the rod itself; for if subconscious muscular action were alone concerned it is not apparent why a copper rod should function worse than one of hazel and better than one of iron.

We must, however, conclude with Chevreul and Barrett that there is no movement proper to the rod independently of human muscles; and we still ascribe the phenomenon to unconscious muscular contraction. The dowser often opposes, or seems to oppose, the movement of the rod. Mr. Lemoine says that it turns despite the will of the operator, sometimes so strongly that he can hold it only with difficulty; he may even find it impossible to hold it at all.

This fact is analogous to the occasional violent movement of a table when a powerful medium barely touches it.

Lemoine records that at the end of the experiments the hands of the Abbe Caubin were covered with callosities, not on the palms only but at the articulations of the fingers also.

Some dowsers are convinced that the rod turns of itself without muscular contractions, and it is to be noted that a silken or woollen glove stops the action. But the opinion of these professional dowsers, though not to be disregarded, is not to be taken on faith; they are evidently sincere, but they cannot be aware of their subconscious movements. The matter is as difficult to settle as whether the movements of a table are due to muscular contractions when the medium is hardly touching the table.

It will be seen further on that some (exceptional) mediums produce raps and movements at a distance. If the force acting on the rod is not due to muscular contractions, might it not be due to a special kind of telekinesis? Evidently the forces acting on the rod only act through a human intermediary. It would be interesting to carry out a methodical investigation whether dowsers could act as table-mediums and conversely; that would be a new experiment worth trying. It would seem not impossible. According to J. de Tristan and H. Mager, about 20 per cent, or more of ordinary persons can act as dowsers. Experiments in this direction would certainly give useful data.

If it were proved that the rod is not actuated by human muscles then it would be a true case of telekinesis. H. Mager has attempted to show that forces capable of turning the rods emanate from matter. He has even tried to indicate the direction and potential of these forces. This would be a physical phenomenon absolutely new and unknown; but his argument is feeble, or even futile. A human agent has always been necessary, there is no bending of the rod without the dowser. Therefore, as a rod which can turn does not turn when put into a machine, and as the hand of the dowser is indispensable, we must perforce admit either that the action is muscular or that it is a human telekinesis.

Between these two hypotheses I do not hesitate. Although I have no personal experience, I put the opinion of the scientists above that of the dowsers; these think that the rod moves of itself, those that it turns because the muscles of the dowser turn it.1



3. Concerning Rhabdic Force

The movements of the rod, then, are due to the unconscious muscular contractions of the individual holding it. It is therefore averred that subterranean waters and metals deep in the earth or hidden in boxes exert an action on our subconsciousness, and that this mysterious action is an unknown physical force, for it is neither humidity, heat, nor electricity.

Such a force emanating from objects is entirely unknown; its existence is hypothetical, but the hypothesis is necessary, for without it, if there were not some determinate energizing influ-

^ee Chapter XVI (very obscure) of H. Mager and J. de Tristan, Recherche s sur quelques effluves terrestres (1826), et les Comptes rendus du lie congres international de psychologie experimental de 191 3-

ence, we could not connect muscular movements with a real external fact with which they are obviously in close relation.

This rhabdic force has been studied sufficiently for some indication of its laws to be even now possible.

Everything takes place as if there were conduction of this force from the ground through the human body; and as if this force, like electricity and heat, could be stopped by gloves of silk or wool, or by india-rubber soles to the shoes.

This force does not emanate only from water. The old trials were almost invariably to find water, but recent experiments have shown that metals also have definite reactions.

These reactions differ according to the metal used. This has been proved by J. de Tristan, H. Mager,1 and Paul Lemoine.

The results obtained independently of each other by H. Mager and P. Lemoine, aided by the Abbe Caubin, agree closely. Taking one gram of gold as sufficient to act on the rod, the quantities of other metals necessary to produce the same results are as follows:

Silver 1.2 grams

Nickel 6 grams

Aluminum 15 grams

Zinc 40 grams

Lead 75 grams

Copper 125 grams

These figures must not be taken as exact, like magnetic measurements, but they are sufficient to show that rhabdic force is amenable to physical measurement.

This establishes a fact of the first importance — that a certain force emanates from metals, sheets of water, and metallic salts, and this force acts with sufficient energy on the organism of certain persons to induce strong unconscious muscular contractions.

There is no effect without its cause. If subterranean water induces deflections of the rod, it must act as a cause — that is, as a force — on the rod. Evidently the action is by the intermediary of the muscles, but that does not make it the less true that there is a new physical force whose direction and conduction can be measured.

^ee H. Mager, Les moyens de dicouvrir les eaux souterraines et de les utiliser, Paris, Dunod, 1912.

This rhabdic force certainly does not act directly on the muscles, but on the nervous system that moves them; the muscles are the passive agents of the nervous system, and we are thus brought to an inference whose importance no one can fail to grasp — that there emanates from metals, water, and metallic salts a force that acts on the nervous system. This we will call rhabdic force.

To study the phenomenon somewhat further: Is this a direct action on the unintelligent nervous system? Or is it an action upon the subconscious intelligence which then elaborates the notion received?

These are not the same. A signal light only shows us the way because we understand its meaning: its feeble light would not, of itself, determine any motion; and if the sight of it causes us to quicken our pace that is because by a complicated psychic reflex the intelligence has answered to the signal. It seems probable that the inflection of the rod is of this kind, and if the muscles bend it energetically that is not because the nervous system is directly influenced but because the subconscious intelligence has been awakened by the rhabdic force. A notion has been received by the subconsciousness, elaborated there, and transformed into muscular contraction; it is certainly not a crude stimulus to the nervous centres. The subconscious intelligence intervenes to transform a feeble stimulus into a powerful one.

The pendulum can be employed instead of the divining-rod with similar results. In the hands of a sensitive, while seemingly inert, it suddenly begins to vibrate on passing certain places; sometimes this vibration is so powerful as to whirl it about. The movements are due to unconscious muscular action, so absolutely unconscious that the operator is himself much surprised. The pendulum, like the rod, is only the indicator of a kind of nervous excitement.

This excitement is sometimes so violent that certain sensitives, as M. Vire tells me, are taken with a kind of convulsion on passing over a subterranean spring whose location is unknown to them. Such hyperesthesia is very rare; but a considerable number of sensitives feel a shudder or tremor.

Thus the perturbation of the nervous system produced by rhabdic force approaches cryptesthesia: instead of remaining a simple sensation it is a sensation accompanied by a cognition of actualities, this cognition being always subconscious. This is proved by the fact that if a metal (e.g., iron, gold, or copper) is placed in the hand holding the pendulum and causing it to oscillate, the pendulum will only move on the sensitive passing over a mass of the same metal. If water is sought it will suffice to hold a bottle of water; if seeking a cavern or grotto the sensitive will take a small empty tube in his hand, which is comic enough. The fact of the ability to discern more or less accurately the presence of bones, grottos, pieces of cast iron, ingots of gold, and watersprings is more than nervous excitation; it is a knowledge of actual things — in a word, it is cryptesthesia. Therefore the studies that have been made on the divining-rod are a most valuable contribution towards a theory of cryptesthesia. Divination by the rod is a form of pragmatic cryptesthesia.

No one can deny the existence of forces in being which have been called telluric1 but which I prefer to call rhabdic (Gr. tdfido<; = a rod), which move the cryptesthesia of the dowser, just as the contact with a given object enables a sensitive to acquire cognitions that his normal senses could not reveal.



4. Deductions from the Point of View of Cryptesthesia

At first sight the study of the divining-rod would have seemed outside metapsychics, but the existence of rhabdic force brings us back into its full current.

In the chapter on pragmatic cryptesthesia (psychometry) I have indicated that things certainly exert some action on intelligence. If a medium or somnambule is given some object that has belonged to a person, A., they will give characteristics of A. that could not have been reached by normal means. I call this "pragmatic cryptesthesia" (Gr. Tleay^a = a fact, a thing done), because it seems connected with an unknown emanation from actual things. Pragmatic cryptesthesia is far f/om explaining all lucidity; in fact, it explains very little; but it incontestably exists.

I conclude, therefore, that the divining-rod is an instrument that can arouse pragmatic cryptesthesia: i.e., it can reveal facts about things that our normal senses cannot reveal. The study of the modes of transmission, the resistances and obstacles to this flow of force show that careful analysis may give us precise data on the unknown forces emanating from things, which, if they

H'his is the word used by Professor M. Benedikt, Rutcn und Pendellehre, 1 vol., i2mo, Hartleben, 191 7.

cannot touch our consciousness, can at least react upon our organs.

The analogy is remote between the force that proceeds from a subterranean spring and causes the muscles of a dowser to contract, and the mysterious emanation from a lock of hair, a watch or a ring which tells a medium that the article in question has belonged to Marguerite, George, or Robert, and gives some indications on these personalities. But both phenomena are of the same order of magnitude.

I do not say that they are the same. I say that the movements of the rod are pragmatic cryptesthesia, not that they explain the movements of a table; but two laws emerge which, if well understood, give a definite point of departure for metapsychics:

A. Unknown forces emanate from things, and these forces are amenable to measure and comparison by physical means.

B. These unknown forces do not affect our conscious senses nor our physical instruments; nevertheless they act (according to unknown laws) very energetically on the subconscious organism so as to produce cognitions that the normal senses cannot give.

Dowsers may be compared to table-mediums, for there is considerable similarity between them. The rhabdic force that acts on a human organism and produces muscular contractions reveals to consciousness facts that consciousness alone could not reach; and similarly a medium gets, through a table, answers that amaze himself.

Therefore, alike for the divining-rod and the moving table, the unconscious muscular action is a revealer of vibrations which the emanations from actual things arouse in our subconscious intelligence.

This chapter on the divining-rod is much abridged; this important question should have been developed at much greater length; but my book is already so long that I could not give more space to the subject.



Chapter V. Metapsychism in Animals

It may be questioned whether there is an animal metapsychism distinct from the human. The question deserves consideration because the strange phenomena presented by the Elberfeld horses and the Mannheim dogs have been referred to mediumistic causes. We think that this problem — as interesting as it is obscure — does not belong to metapsychics. Nevertheless, mention of the facts must be made, if only to decide whether to retain them or to dismiss them.

About 1892, at Berlin, William von Osten made known some strange facts; he had taught a horse (der kluge Hans) to reckon. A scientific commission was appointed, which settled nothing. The matter would have rested there had not an ingenious and enthusiastic merchant of Elberfeld, one Karl Krall, resumed Von Osten's experiments and devoted much skill and energy to developing the arithmetical powers of certain horses.1

The facts relative to the power of horses to calculate are given very briefly, as follows:

Four horses were trained by Mr. Krall, named Muhamad, Zarif, a pony H'dnschen, and an old blind horse Barto.

These were able to solve simple arithmetical problems, and even some very complicated ones. They gave their answers by striking blows with their hoofs: thus to give "54" they would strike 5 times with the left and 4 times with the right hoof.

They could add, subtract, and multiply, and also extract square roots, which latter is perhaps only seemingly more extraordinary.

1The bibliography is already extensive. See Krall's Denkende Thiere. The numerous polemical articles aroused by this work cannot be cited, but O. Pfungst's book deserves special mention. Maeterlinck, who went to see the horses, wrote on them in The Unknown Guest; and C. de Vesme has summed up the questions raised (A. S. P., 191 2, 352-363, and A. S. P., i9i3> 1 17-128). There are two admirable articles by E. Claparede in the Arch, de Psychol, de Geneve, 191 2, xii, 263 and 19 13, xiii, 244-284. See also E. Duchatel on Les animaux savants de Mannheim (A. S. P., 191 3, 289-303). There are also several works in Italian. These references, however, give only a slight idea of the volume of comment on the subject.

Mr. Assagioli, alone with the pony Hanschen, wrote on the blackboard 33+44 and Hanschen answered 77. Then he wrote 12+33+33 and the animal replied 87, the digits 8 and 7 being interchanged (which is often the case), 87 for 78.

In the absence of Mr. Krall and the groom, Muhamad gave M. Claparede the fourth root (!!) of 456,776, and the cube root of 15,376.

Maeterlinck wittily describes how he named a chance number for Muhamad to give its square root, but the horse did not reply, the number having no exact square root; a fact that vastly astonished M. Maeterlinck.

But there is more yet. The Elberfeld horses, by choosing cards with letters on them, could carry on conversations; they spoke, by the alphabet, phonetically without vowels.

Their conversations are curious, as one may well imagine. One day Muhamad denounced the groom for having struck Hanschen. Sometimes they say they are tired and will not answer. They knew one person present to be a lady because "she had long hair."

All this is very odd; but before going further we must enquire whether there is trickery or illusion.

Trickery by Mr. Krall may be ruled out. All observers of the horses, even the sceptical ones, agree in this. His honesty is unquestioned; he often left the horse and the observer alone together. This was the case in many experiments. The presence of Krall or the grooms was not needed for correct replies. Sometimes the horse was left quite alone in the stable and was watched through a glazed chink in the wall.

The solution reached is often too quick even for a good arithmetician. Mr. Krall wrote on the blackboard ^91 125, the number given him by M. Assagioli, and in a few seconds Muhamad gave the correct answer.

In presence of these astonishing and improbable facts, the official German scientists drew up an equally astonishing protest. Twenty-four professors signed this ridiculous document and among these there were only two who had seen the horses. Those two had the right to say that Krall's observations were illusory, the others had no right to say anything.

Their protest brings nothing new towards a solution; they say that to allow that horses can calculate like men is subversive of the evolutionary theory. This curious manifesto is reprinted by Claparede (loc. cit., p. 265).

We may lay down the following provisional conclusions:

1. The hypothesis that the horses are trained to answer by a system of signs can be completely put aside.

2. Neither is Pfungst's hypothesis, that they respond to unconscious signs by the experimenters, any more useful.

The horses have often answered when no witness at all was with them and therefore no sign at all could have been made.

A methodical analysis of the conditions under which replies were given has led Claparede to the following statements that bear on a possible theory:

t. After four to six months of schooling the horses make no further progress. Krall considers his pupils as having the mind of intelligent but ignorant children, from six to eight years old.

2. They can invent nothing and can only do what they have been taught. However complicated the process of extracting cube roots, it is not beyond the powers of any moderately intelligent child of ten, after some months of teaching.

3. They are often unable to solve very simple questions; such as to say how many persons are present in the stable, though this is much easier (to our anthropomorphic notions) than the extraction of the fourth root of 456,776.

4. They do not seem to work out anything; they hardly look at the figures on the blackboard. Ferrari and Probli have emphasized this inattention on the part of the horse Tripoli whom they endeavoured to train in Italy after the Elberfeld manner. Tripoli replied after a careless look at the blackboard.

5. The errors made are often transpositions of figures, as if they were errors in reading. When the animal is not sure of the result it strikes a timid blow, but strikes strongly when sure of the answer.

In view of these incoherent results, we must remain uncertain as to the mechanism of the facts, as we have so often had to do in other metapsychic questions.

Nevertheless, on the positive evidence of such good observers as Claparede, Ferrari, Edinger, Ziegler, Assagioli, Hartkopf, and others, I incline to think that the horses really calculate and that the arithmetical operations are manifestations of their intelligence.

Moreover, it is not only horses that are capable of such calculations. Krall thought that the elephant, which shows such remarkable intelligence, might give better results. He got a young elephant, Kana; but the youngster was very lazy and gave only blunders! The dog Rolf, of Mannheim, and the cat Daisy presented some curious facts of the same kind. Rolf would appear to have made it known of his own accord that he could reckon, and had learned to do so by hearing the lessons given to a child (Buchstabierende Hunde, Psych. Studien, 1918, xlv, 142).

We cannot suppose that Muhamad, Rolf, Hanschen, and Barto were exceptional beings; if they gave proof of intelligence it is fairly certain that other animals could do the like. Then why are not these feats repeated? Why are they isolated facts, both in science and legend?

If this arithmetical aptitude were a real phenomenon and no illusion, it should be possible to make hundreds of calculating horses. But this is not done, no others have followed. Why, if it is not an illusion?

This seems to me the most serious objection that can be put forward against the facts alleged by Krall, an objection so grave that it almost negatives them.

The uncertainty of the facts makes any theoretical treatment necessarily brief.

