Between 1882 and 1884 Miss Morton saw this shape five or six times. Her sister, her brother, the housemaid, and a child saw it too. "Sometimes." says Miss Morton, "she tried to speak to me, but only gave a slight si^h." The subjectivity of the phantom, although it was seen by the brother and sister, is proved by the fact that sometimes Miss Morton could see it distinctly when other persons present saw nothing. Nevertheless — and this is highly important as proving that Miss Morton s hallucination was not entirely subjective—one evening in August at 8 P.M. foot permit saw the phantom at the same moment. From 1884 to 1885

n the morning the and fall of mctal-

'Ifyrra. P. S. P. R. viii. 311. Bomaoo's caw 11.

the apparition showed itself most frequently. From 1886 it became mem nebulous and indistinct; in 1889 nothing couM he seen though steps were still heard as late as 1892.

This case is instructive, for it shows that objectivity may be incomplete. The phantom was subjective, for it was not seen hv all the persons present, but yet was sometimes seen by several persons as a collective visualization. The persistence in one locality will also be noted.

There is a very curious and ancient case of haunting reported by Pliny the Younger (Letters, vii, 27).

"Erat Atkenis spatiosa et capax domus, scd infamis et pestilens. Per silentium noctis sonus ferri, et, si attendcres acrius, strepitus vinculorum longius primo, deinde e proximo reddebatur: mox apparebat idolon, senex macie et squalore confectus, promissa barbo, horrenti capillo; cruribus compedes, manibus catenas gerebat et quatiebatr

It secm< that the house was abandoned; no one would buy it or live in it. The philosopher Athenodorus, however, did not hesitate to brave the phantom. He installed himself in the house with his tablets and a light and started writing. At midnight the phantom came. "Stabat effigies innuebatque digito, similis vocanti hie contra ut paulum ex spec tar et manu significat, rursusque ceru et stilo incumbit. (If the story is true, Athenodorus showed remarkable coolness.) Ilia scribentis capiti catenis insonabat. Resfiat rursus idem quod prius innucntem, nec moratus tollit lumen et sequitur. Ibat Mo lento gradu quasi grains tinculis. In short the phantom disappeared, leaving Athenodorus in a lonely place, which the philosopher marked so as to know it again. Next morning the magistrates made excavations and a skeleton was found, which was publicly buried. From that time the haunting ceased.

No verification can be had for an event two thousand years old, but the similarity, or rather the identity, of the ancient hauntings with those of today should make even the most sceptical think over them.

At St. Boswell a phantom appeared to several persons — to Miss Scott and to her sister Louise Scott, and to Miss I rvirte. Al>out ten other persons also saw it between 1893 and 1901. The form was that of a man dressed in black, with a long black cloak of ancient fashion, a white cravat, and a broad-brimmed hat. He was thin and pale, and appeared in the open street. Miss Scott having tried to overtake him he moved before her, too quickly to be overtaken. It seems that two boys of the village once saw him appear with a threatening gesture; they fled and the phantom vanished. The people of St. Boswell are not inclined to risk themselves in that street at night.1

Miss Bedford (/. 5\ P. R., xii, 18; Bozzano's case 8) saw at W., on the road near a river, the form of a man looking despairingly at the water. Her friend Miss Locke had also seen him some time previously. It seems that at that very place a man had thrown himself into the river through a disappointment in love. Mrs. Locke (Miss Locke's mother) saw the same phantom several times.

Mrs. Vatas Simpson relates that when a child, playing with her brothers and sisters, she saw an old woman slowly mounting the stairs at the top of which she disappeared without opening the door facing the staircase. She then saw her on the other side of the door. Though all happened long ago she remembers quite well that her brothers also saw the same form and not on that day only, but on following days. Her mother noted the fact in her diary, adding that in this house, which had the reputation of being haunted, she had seen not only the old lady, but others. There were sounds of footsteps and the wailing of an infant. One day Mr. Vatas Simpson was annoyed by footsteps in his room, though the servants had allowed no one to enter. He went in and saw an old woman, small, thin, and very pale, wearing a large hat whose ribbons were tied under her chin. Her hands were clasped. He thought her a real person, but she vanished in front of him.

When a child, Mrs. Louise du Cane, and also her brothers and a sister, saw the reflection of a phantom in a mirror, but this case is not very evidential (communicated by Dr. Kingston, /. S. P. R., v, 223; Bozzano's case 10).

Bozzano cites the case of a phantom seen by several persons in full daylight for some minutes and on several occasions. It was a woman dressed in black that Mr. W.-D. G. saw sitting before the toilet-glass. It is curious that the mirror did not reflect the phantom.

If this case was well observed, which is problematical, it is interesting as showing that the image was subjective, produced by auto-suggestion. If the phantom had been objective it would

i/. 5". P. R., vi, 146 and ix, 298, case V. de Bozzano, 47.

have been seen in the mirror. Its objectivity was therefore not of the same order as that of normal objects.

Miss Lucy Brown and Mary Brown (pseudonyms) were residing in a house where tragic events had taken place, a woman having hanged herself. Besides this a part of the house had been destroyed by a fire, and a woman had perished in the flames. According to the summary of the depositions of the Misses Brown given by Myers the phantom of the woman who had been burned was seen by Mary and Lucy Brown simultaneously three times, and once by each of them singly. The servants had seen it also, but their testimony was not available. Mrs. Jones, whose phantom was seen, was unknown to the Brown sisters, but their description corresponds well with that of Mrs. Jones by those who knew her. The phantom seemed to repeat the despairing gestures which Mrs. Jones had been seen to make in the burning room (Myers, /. S\ P. R., iv, 1899, 27-30; Bozzano's case 13).

The fact that a person long dead may manifest to several persons in the place he had lived in is borne out by the following story told by two sisters, Mrs. Judd and Mrs. Dear (Caroline and Mary), both very trustworthy (Delanne, Les apparitions materialisees, 1911, ii, 81):

Three weeks after her grandmother's death, Caroline, on waking one morning in October, 1866, saw distinctly the form of her grandmother, as she well remembered it, tall, calm in aspect, with her large dark eyes fixed on the face of the old clock. Caroline closed her eyes for a few seconds, then slowly reopened them. The form was still there, then quickly vanished. Mary had the same vision in the same room at the same hour. She only spoke of it in the evening, having kept silence all day from fear of ridicule.

Ten or twelve officers were dining in their mess at Aldershot. Suddenly all saw a young woman in bridal dress, soiled and worn, who passed slowly before the window. No one could have passed there, for the window is thirty feet above the ground (Telepathic hallucinations, 356).

L. Tyre saw in her room about 6 p.m. an old woman lying down fully dressed on the bed, her face being turned towards the window. Mrs. Tyre's two sisters who came in saw nothing, the bed was empty and the coverlet undisturbed; Mrs. Tyre, however, still continued to see the old woman and described her. She again saw the phantom two days later, she alone perceiving it. She saw it very often, so often that they became used to it and called it "L.'s old woman." But it was never seen but by her (Delanne, Appar. materialisees, ii, 26). We are therefore compelled to think that it was a hallucination; but possibly it was veridical, for it seems that the description given corresponds exactly with an old woman who died in the house some years previously. These recognitions are, however, so uncertain that they have no value, and one must suppose that this was a mere hallucination without any objective reality.1

Miss A. sees in her room a cousin, Mrs. X., six months dead, sitting in a white dress, with a pleated neck-tie. Fifteen days later the same phantom returned, walked to the bed where Miss A. was lying, and threw the bedclothes to the ground. Miss A., terrified, lit the gas and saw nothing (Delanne, ii, 102).

Some time later, in a neighbouring house, Mr. X., the husband of the deceased woman, twice saw the form of a woman whose features he could not distinguish. There was a loud crash in the room, waking Mr. X.'s young son.

Mrs. X.'s sister saw the same phantom which tried to lift the bedclothes as in Miss A.'s case. The phantom reappeared three times, at intervals of several days. Doors opened, and footsteps were heard on the stairs.

Thus, says Delanne, an apparition was seen seven times by four different persons. Most of the appearances were too long after the death for them to be ascribed to the emotions of a recent loss. All the same, the authenticity of these phenomena is very doubtful; for the scientific standing of the witnesses is insufficient to warrant the acceptance of such extraordinary facts.

Miss H., at Malta, aged eight years, saw, eight days after her mother's death, the phantom of her mother standing by her bed, weeping and wringing her hands. The child cried out, and her Maltese nurse came, who felt something terrible but undefinable, and fell on her knees to pray. The father of Miss H. also saw the same apparition (Delanne, ii, 84).

Mrs. R. of Philadelphia, widow of Dr. R., being in the central hall of her house with her eldest daughter aged nineteen, saw (and her daughter also) a woman dressed in black with a white neckerchief over her head enter the hall, carrying a white silk

^Although such are very rare, there may be hallucinations among normal persons. Mr. Marillier has described a personal experience: for a whole month he had the hallucination of a woman entering his room and standing

by him {Revue philosophique).

purse. A younger daughter also saw the apparition, but less distinctly. The form stopped a moment before the portrait of Dr. R., and seemed to be looking at it for about half a minute, then disappeared without the door having been opened. The form was recognized as that of the grandmother of the girls, who had died ten years previously. It is to be noted that she had not lived in the house where she appeared (R. Dale Owen, The Debatable Land, 319).

In his valuable study, Dei fenomeni dJinfestazionc, Bozzano gives different cases in which the ghost seems to indicate his wishes, or to show regret for an act done in life. But as these cases are not of collective visions, it is more rational to suppose that they are hallucinations, illusions, and imaginings. Provisionally at any rate they must be excluded from metapsychic science. All the intentions attributed to phantoms are too fanciful and too simply anthropomorphic to be insisted upon.

The lights that appear in certain places pertain also to phenomena of haunting. M. Duchatel has collected numerous statements regarding a light that appeared at Busso, in Corsica, near Bocognano. Was this a natural phenomenon? A priori this seems highly probable. It seems that the light vanished as soon as anyone approached the place where it seemed to be. All this is very vague, and cannot be taken seriously {A. S. P., February, 1913, 34-40).

Similar facts which rest on the slight foundation of popular legend have been alleged at Berbenno (Valteline); at Vo; in Italy at Padua; at Saint-Julien (Soissons); in Cardiganshire; at Quargento (Piedmont) and Grand-Fougeray (Ille-et-Vilaine). Nothing can be founded on these tales, but it seems well to mention them, in the event of similar phenomena being made the subject of careful scientific investigation.

The following is a fact equally difficult to accept or to reject — it is reported by Mrs. Sidgwick (P. S. P. R., iii, 76, 1885):

Two ladies, Mrs. F. and her sister, saw in the street during a thick fog numerous human forms passing by. Some were tall persons which seemed to enter the body of one of the two sisters. The servant who was with the two ladies cried out in terror. In this crowd of phantoms there were men, women, and dogs. The women wore high bonnets and large shawls of old fashion. Their faces were livid and cadaverous. The whole phantasmal troop accompanied Mrs. F. and her sister about three hundred yards.

Sometimes they seemed to be lit up by a kind of yellow light. When Mrs. F., her sister, and the servant reached their house only one single individual of the crowd, taller than the others and hideous in appearance, remained. He then disappeared also. This hallucination is unique of its kind, and therefore cannot be used, though it was collective and simultaneous. It seems difficult to refer so precise a description to an effect of fog.

To this singular story may be added another, also insufficiently supported — that of a somewhat similar hallucination of two ladies who, at the Trianon (Versailles) thought they saw a reunion of personages dressed in the fashion of 1785 in the time of Marie Antoinette (Bozzano, 143). It is difficult not to suppose this a prolonged hallucination; somnambules under hypnotism could tell many such stories.

Occurrences of this kind must not be admitted into the annals of metapsychics. In every isolated exceptional case, we ought to wait, without trying to explain or to understand, and provisionally, to take these cases as not having occurred.



3. Telekinesis in Haunted Houses

The causes of error (which should always be considered first) are not the same for objective as for subjective infestations. The subjective phenomena depend on the good faith, never doubtful, of the observers, but good faith is not enough; an aberration, a hallucination, or an illusion is always to be suspected. It concerns us, then, to know whether everything can be explained by illusion. This hypothesis must be admitted when the observer is only one person, but it is difficult to imagine four or five normal persons having the same hallucination again and again for several months.

But with objective phenomena the difficulty is quite otherwise. In such cases all kinds of frauds are possible, and experience shows that such frauds are very frequent. When in a house said to be haunted crashes are heard, the opening and shutting of doors, rolling furniture, breakage of crockery, and all the train of ridiculous manifestations common to such cases, the idea naturally occurs of a practical joke made by ill-disposed persons, by dismissed servants, or by those interested in getting rid of some of the inmates. Very usually the cause of such infestations must be attributed to very young persons of either sex, half idiots and half vicious, who throw stones, and break windows without fully understanding what they are doing, who hide their actions and let people think that they have not moved, without any other motive than a wish to deceive.

Therefore all hauntings accompanied with a displacement of things must be subjected to the severest criticism, the rather that when such strict scrutiny has been made, the miracles, with some few exceptions, have evaporated.

Nevertheless, despite our scepticism, which is considerable, there remain some facts, infrequent, but too clear to make it possible to deny them real objectivity.

I will give in the first place a somewhat detailed account of the events that came to pass at the chateau of T., in Normandy, near Caen. M. de X. noted down day by day all that happened, and his diary was communicated to M. J. Morice, doctor of laws, who published it in the Annalcs de Sciences Psychiques, 1892, 212-213, and 1893, 65-90.

M. de X. inherited, in 1867, a house that passed as being haunted. In 1868 there were abnormal noises, which ceased, but were resumed more vigorously in 1875. From the 13th of October, 1875, to the 30th of January, 1876 — that is, for over three months — abnormal noises, sometimes very loud, continued to be heard. M. de X. took every precaution not to be tricked. He always kept his revolver handy and it was well known that he would not hesitate to use it. On one occasion a friend of M. de X., hearing in the night noises in his room, fired several times by guess; the bullets were found in the wall. The cellars and the walls were carefully searched; two formidable watch-dogs were loosed every night. There was no possible doubt of the objectivity of the noises, heard sometimes by twelve persons who composed the entire personnel of the chateau. There was certainly no imposture on the part of the servants, for they were all terrified and gathered together; and when all were thus assembled, the phenomena were sometimes loudest.

Moreover, in certain cases, the fraud of one servant would not have produced the results. Extremely violent knocks were heard in one part of the house, and one second later, in another part.

One day Mme. de X., hearing a noise, came out to investigate. Before she touched the door, she saw the key turn quickly in the lock, come away, and strike her left hand. The Abbe Z., tutor to her young son, witnessed this. I copy from the diary of M. de X. relative to the events of the 25-26th of January (p. 75):

"One o'clock. Twelve blows followed by a long drumming, then thirty rapid single knocks, one would have thought that the house was shaken; we were rocked in our beds on every story... then a long rush of feet; the whole lasting only five minutes. A minute later the whole house was shaken again from top to bottom; ten tremendous blows on the door of the green room. Twelve cries outside, three bellowings, followed by furious outcries. Very loud drumming in the vestibule, rhythmical, up to fifty knocks. 1.30 a.m. The house shaken twenty times; strokes so quick that they could not be counted. Walls and furniture alike quivered; nine heavy blows on the door of the green room, a drumming accompanied by heavy blows. At this moment bellowings like those of a bull were heard, followed by wild non-human cries in the corridor. We rang up all the servants and when all were up we again heard two bellowings and one cry."

Several priests were then called upon for ritual exorcism. The phenomena diminished but did not entirely cease.

I do not know what became of the chateau T. in the sequel. The story is disturbing; a prolonged and violent mystification by the servants of M. de X., by his young son, or by the tutor would seem nearly impossible as an explanation of all that took place.

C. Lombroso (Riccrche sui fenomeni spiritici, Turin, 1909, 247) tells the story of a certain hostelry of Turin where very violent noises occurred, especially breakages of bottles and crockery. Chairs were broken noisily; objects suspended from the walls fell to the ground. Lombroso himself, by the light of a candle, saw bottles roll on the ground before him and finally smash. He made sure that there were no strings to move them. One day when glasses and plates had been set on the table for dinner, the whole were broken and dinner had to be served in another room. In full light at 8 a.m. objects flew through the air, going into the next room and breaking at the feet of two travellers who had come to the hostelry. A bottle of soda-water, in full daylight and under the eyes of several persons, moved through the air four to five yards, slowly as if held by a hand; finally it fell to the ground and burst.

It seems that these phenomena were connected with the presence of a boy of thirteen; for when he had been sent away all the phenomena ceased.

This, however, in no way implies that there was trickery. It is extremely probable that there are mediums who do not know themselves to be such, and produce telekinetic phenomena by the mere fact of their presence, quite apart from any experimental intention. Many so-called haunted nouses are not haunted at all; they are inhabited by mediums unconscious of their powers.

A very singular case has been narrated by Major B. Moor of the Royal Society of London (I have not been able to consult his book, Bealings Bells) and give the details from Bozzano (p. 164): On the 2d of February, 1834, the bells of his house in Ipswich began to ring loudly during the day without any apparent cause. This continued for fifty-three clays. They were not electric bells. Sometimes the whole twelve bells of the house rang together, even those whose bell-pulls were completely visible except where the wires entered the walls. Mr. Moor often tried to ring the bells equally loudly by pulling the cord as strongly as possible but could never equal the extraordinary violence in the other case. "When we pulled the bell," says Mr. Moor, "its movement was slow and quite visible; but when moved by an occult power the movement was so rapid that nothing could be seen." This was verified by more than twelve persons, so that the hypothesis of hallucination will not hold. Sometimes the bells rang when there was no one in the house. Major Moor concludes definitely that the movement was due to no human cause.

He wrote to various persons to ascertain whether similar phenomena had been observed before, and obtained many answers. He collected fourteen similar cases, of which Bozzano quotes only that of Mrs. Milnes, who, at 4.30 p.m., in her house at Westminster, found all her family alarmed. The bells rang with such energy that the servants and children were terrified. Mr. Milnes, on arriving at the house, examined everything minutely and watched all the wires. The ringing continued furiously for two hours and a half.

In connection with bells, the still more doubtful case given below may be mentioned:

The two women, Mme. Martillet and Mme. Claudet, who nursed Alfred de Musset in his last illness, say that as he lay in his armchair they saw by the light of the lamp that he was looking at the bell near the mantelpiece. But he was so feeble that he could not rise. "At that moment," says Mme. Martillet, "we were surprised and frightened; the bell-pull that the sick man had not reached, moved, as if by an invisible hand, and my sister and I took each other's hands saying, 'Did you hear? Did you see? He did not leave his chair... The servant came, having heard the bell" (Lefevre, Musset sensitif, A. S. P., 1899, 106).

Should the singular phenomena mentioned in all ages as accompanying a death or serious event be considered as akin to hauntings? There are legends of clocks stopping, pictures falling, some object noisily breaking, etc., but it is difficult to determine the part played by chance coincidence.

Cheiro (Count Hamon) says that on Monday, June 5, 1915, as he was sitting chatting with two friends in his country house at 8 o'clock in the evening, some heavy object fell with a crash in the adjoining room; it was a large oaken shield bearing the arms of Great Britain that had been broken by the fall. The fracture was in the part representing England and Ireland; and Cheiro said, "there has doubtless been some naval disaster in which Ireland is concerned." At that very time Lord Kitchener, an Irishman, perished in the Hampshire (A. S. P., July, 1916, 122). It is needless to criticize; this is mere coincidence, and not very cogent.

Aksakoff (Animisme et Spiritisme, 1895, 286) cites various cases of persecution much resembling hauntings; but his observations must be taken with some reserve; his credulity is no more to be doubted than his honesty.

The case of the Rev. Mr. Shelp related by Mr. Capron (Modem Spiritualism) is very open to suspicion; for it does not seem certain that Mr. Shelp took all the necessary measures to ensure that his son, aged eleven, was not the voluntary agent in the phenomena. Chairs rose in the air and fell with crashes, a chandelier was taken from the mantelpiece, knocked against the ceiling several times, and broke; a brush was thrown through the window; a glass left the worktable and broke the last pane left intact; garments moved about the room, inflated as if to resemble human figures (!!). As Dr. Shelp and his son Harry were out driving sixteen stones as large as eggs were thrown into the carriage.

AksakofFs other story of persecution is more interesting, and seems to have been carefully observed by M. Schtcharoff (against whom the persecution seems to have been directed) and by M. Akoutine, chemical engineer of Orenburg. The medium was probably M. Schtcharoff's wife, unknown to herself. Akoutine tried to divide the phenomena into those of attraction and repulsion, but no law could be discovered. Sometimes things flew from the table at which people were sitting; at other times, when a cupboard was opened, the things would fall on Mme. S., moving to a greater distance afterwards. These improbable facts were repeated during several months, sometimes very energetically. A sofa weighing one hundred and eighty to two hundred pounds on which Mme. S.'s mother was reclining began to dance, raising itself into space with the lady (!). Garments often took fire in a way that could not be explained and some very strange facts are related by M. S., who discusses very coolly whether there can be hallucination on his own part or trickery by his wife; and concludes in the negative in both cases. We shall be still more prudent, and conclude (always provisionally) with a large note of interrogation.

We can draw no other conclusion from the case of Lillian F. (Carrington, The Problems of Psychical Science, London, 1914, p. 341.) In the various houses in which she lived, she had to endure real hauntings from her childhood onwards. In an old house at Memphis (Tenn.) doors opened; there were knockings on the windows, on the mirrors, and on the beds. Heavy steps were heard in the hall. Lillian and her mother both heard these noises and were terrified by them. In Maryland similar phenomena testified to by other persons than Lillian F., as also at Lafayette Street (Baltimore), Memphis, Maryland, and New York.

Miss Mary Savage, on retiring to rest, heard knocks on the bed, soon becoming very loud and seeming to move round her in circles. Her friend, Miss Sarah Soothywoode, who was in the next room, heard "a tremendous noise"; so hallucination cannot be accepted as an explanation (Carrington, p. 288).

Ada Sinclair reported phenomena of telekinesis and haunting the details of which are of interest. They are not to be classed as entirely accidental since they occurred in connection with experiments in spiritist rapping-messages. Mrs. L., a friend of Ada Sinclair, was present. Objects were plucked off the wall and projected violently. A porcelain vase was thrown to the ground and broken. On other occasions, in presence of several persons, small articles such as pins and matches were moved; the pins being stuck into walls and clothes. The phenomena were strongest when Mrs. L. was present, but they did not cease when she had gone into the next room (Carrington, p. 306).

The Count de Larmandie has published an account of haunting in his chateau at Sudrie. A piece of wood lying in the corner of a room struck the ceiling and fell at the feet of the count and his sister. It bounded about several times, striking the door, the floor, and the walls. All this in full daylight. When the count or his sisters entered the haunted rooms, there was a hail of little stones (A. Erny, Le Psychisme experimental).

The following fact was not told till forty years after its occurrence, but is quite clear in the memory of the narrator, M. Kouprejanoff, on the superior staff of the Ministry of Public Instruction in Russia. When a young boy, he and his mother and sisters heard logs falling in the shed where they had been placed. They all went to see, taking a lantern and three candles. Twelve persons in succession came to look in the locked shed and saw the logs thrown against the wall, then fall to the ground one after another at short intervals. This lasted close on forty minutes; and the logs came from the middle of the stack, though even a strong man could not have taken them from the lower part of the pile (A. S. P., 1899, ix, 174). But what conclusions can be based on a story written forty years after the event?

Mr. Bristow was working with two comrades in a carpenter's shop. One of the two then accused him of throwing a bit of wood at him, which Mr. Bristow denied. Other pieces were thrown, striking all those present. Nothing could come from outside, for the shutters were not moved and were thickly covered with dust. More than this, Mr. Bristow saw a piece of wood, two fingers wide, come jumping towards him, make a bound of two feet and hit his ear. "A piece of wood lying on the ground jumped into the air, and began to dance among our tools, but when we tried to catch them they evaded our hands. Sometimes they moved about in the air with a waving movement. "

These phenomena went on for six weeks and were testified to by several persons; the bits of wood seemed living and intelligent: they arranged themselves in a pile in one corner of the workshop. They moved most when not looked at; and despite the speed with which they were projected into the air, describing complicated circles and spirals, they fell without noise (P. S. P. R., vii, 383; Bozzano, 186).

Mrs. H. E. Sidgwick and F. Myers analyzed this case with the greatest care and obtained detailed explanations from Mr. Bristow: they connect this haunting with a certain John Gray, a nephew of the proprietor of the workshop, who had not paid his creditors. His uncle, also named John Gray, had not paid them either. As soon as he had paid his nephew's debts the manifestations ceased.

This case is complex and hard to interpret; and though very difficult to accept, it is almost as difficult to reject the formal depositions of Mr. Bristow and his companions.

At Absie (Deux-Sevres) in 1867, according to the police reports (A. S. P., 1905, 86), there was a hail of stones in an unoccupied house. The reports referred to would seem to have been destroyed. No fraud could be discovered. Constable Mousset testified: (1) that the stones fell without doing any harm; (2) that a glass lamp was knocked from the table to the floor by a large stone without being broken; (3) that the stones fell in all directions and were only seen when they rolled on the ground; (4), that the stones continued to be heaped up in the room even when some one was standing at the chimney-piece to observe and there was not the smallest hole in the walls or the windows.

But Mousset's evidence is quite insufficient.

Similarly with the case of Oels (Pomerania). The lights, noises, and phantasmal appearance are testified to by various persons (1916), but after enquiry, a magistrate concluded that they were natural facts due to the conscious or unconscious trickery of children in the house (Psych. Studien, xlvi, 1919, 84; 140). The assertions of Bohn were, however, vigorously combated by Derter (Das Geheimnis des Spukhausen in Oels im Lichte des Uebersinnlichen (A. S. P., 1895, v, 94).

At Niedelsdorf in Switzerland, M. Joller, a national councillor, relates that for twelve days from the 15th to the 27th of August, 1862, mysterious happenings took place at his house. Tables and chairs were upset; heavy hammer-strokes shook the house; objects were taken from the walls, latches were broken off, pictures were reversed on the walls "under our very eyes"; stones were thrown from all sides despite locks and bolts. These strange things went on for six weeks in full daylight. There were also inarticulate noises, melodies, singing, noises of splitting wood, of counting money, and winding a watch. All these facts are described by M. Perty, a professor in the University of Berne (Die mystischen Erscheinungen der menschlichen Natur).

The facts observed by Hector Durville with Raymond Charrier, aged fourteen, at Saint-Sauveur, Yonne, are parallel with the phenomena of hauntings. The usual phenomena are all there — objects projected in the room, mattress and bedclothes thrown on the ground, shoes thrown about. One day at breakfast things were thrown at sitters from all parts of the room. M. Durville took Raymond to his own house at Montmorency. Pamphlets, books, kitchen utensils, and all kinds of objects were projected from all sides. Raymond went out of the room and was already in the passage, when Mr. Durville's walking-stick came off the peg where it was hanging, and was flung after Raymond and fell behind him (A. S. P., 1910, xxi, 116-124).

That such things should happen without Raymond having been caught in the act implies either that they are true or that M. Durville was blind. Nevertheless, he adds the serious remark, "I have never seen any phenomena produced in entirety under my eyes." The whole responsibility for the assertions rests with M. Durville, for there is no other witness to them.

Mr. J. Proctor noted in his diary all the phenomena that occurred in a certain house abandoned because of the strange and disagreeable facts that took place there. As soon as Mr. Proctor took up his abode there, noises, cries, and footsteps were heard which other lodgers could perceive. Two months later, a figure appeared at a window; on another evening the caretaker, his wife, and his daughter saw a priest wearing a stole, who appeared for ten minutes. Knocks were then heard, and were continued for six months at intervals. One night a friend of Mr. Proctor's got up, being frightened by the sight of a phantom and by terrific noises. Invisible beings called lodgers by name. New tenants suffered in the same manner by noises and phantoms and the owners had to give up letting the house (A. S. P., December, 1892, and Lombroso, 259).

Phenomena of haunting would seem to have occurred in the military school at Ypanema (Brazil) in May, 1914. Plates, cups, and saucers were flung about as by an invisible hand. This was verified, says the Diario de Sorocaba, by all the officers and the colonel commanding the school. The phenomena were, however, of brief duration; a scientific committee saw nothing and could verify nothing; the facts therefore remain very doubtful (A. S. P., April, 1916, 70-72).

A question arises, interesting from a practical point of view. It is discussed with documentary evidences by Zingaropoli {Case inf estate dagli Spiriti, Naples, 1917): "Does haunting confer a right to the cancellation of a lease?"

The Parliament of Bordeaux formally decided that it does. In our own day there have been several lawsuits over this — in 1915 at Altavilla (Italy); in 1907 at Naples; in 1896 also at Naples; in 1907 at Egham (England). In the latter case the house had been hired by Mr. Stephen Philips, a well-known dramatic author and poet. He complained that during the night heavy knocks shook the walls and doors, and figures appeared on the stairs and in the passages. The house had already been said to be haunted. The Daily Mail and Light which had spoken of these facts were sued and fined for depreciating the value of the house; though the sentence was reversed on appeal, the newspapers proving that the hauntings were matter of public notoriety.

At Ancona in 1903 the public prosecutor, M. Marracino, states that he and his two sons who are barristers, witnessed singular facts connected with jets of liquid. During the night hats were filled with water; during the day water was thrown on the beds. The walls were examined by engineers who discovered nothing unusual. Milk, wine, and coffee were spilt on the floors. In a locked buffet objects were displaced. It seems that the phenomena were due to the young daughter of M. Marracino who was a medium unknown to herself. One day a book rose up and touched her on the shoulder. (Si sollevo e ando a batter e sulla spalla di lei, quindi, cadde a terra e cominci a saltarellare (!!) comme tnosso da una forza impulsiva, percorse sei o sette volte la camera e, alzandozi di nuovo, ando ad applicicarsi al muro.)

In such cases when the phenomenon is due to a medium who is not aware of the fact (usually a very young child) fraud is often mingled with the phenomena. Maxwell says, with good reason (Bull, de I'lnst. Psych., 1905, 376), that at first there are doubtless genuine phenomena that lead the child to simulate them later on. The unstable mentality of mediums explains this fraud, the more readily that they scarcely know how to distinguish voluntary from involuntary acts: the uncertain state of their consciousness deprives them to a considerable degree of their sense of responsibility.

Kerner observed with the Seeress of Prevorst many mediumistic phenomena that entirely resemble those in haunted houses from which it is difficult to dissociate them. They constitute an abnormal whole that borders on the pathological; hypnotism, lethargy, cryptesthesia, premonitions, experimental telekinesis, and such telekinesis as occurs in haunted houses. Kerner says, "There were knocks and noises like stones thrown, once a table moved jerkily across the room without any visible contact, tin plates were thrown across the kitchen. These stories would have provoked in me a pitiful smile had I not been an ocular witness to the facts." However improbable they may seem, I think it rash to deny them; we do not understand them and cannot explain them, we can only take note of them.

Dr. Hart Raines (quoted by Barrett, P. S. P. R.} 1911, xxv, 404) mentions a very curious case. In January, 1911, three young men were sent to a small telegraphic station at Dale in Georgia, and took possession of their new domicile. Shortly afterwards they found that they could not keep the door shut; it opened despite all their efforts, nails and iron bars were of no use. Stones and other things were thrown into the room; a box of condensed milk rose into the air and passed into the room untouched by anyone; a lantern also rose up and was broken against the wall; a chair was thrown from before the window with such force that it was broken. The three young men were panic-stricken. "One of them walked several miles to the nearest town to resign his position, and he assured Dr. Raines nothing would induce him again to go through the experience he had suffered."

Mr. Murphy, hearing that a house at Enniscorthy (Ireland) was said to be haunted went with Mr. Owen Devereux to pass a night there in the same room with the two young men who lived in the house. It seems that one of them, Mr. Randall, was the agent, for most of the movements of objects and noises took place round him. During the night that Mr. Murphy passed there, repeated noises, becoming more and more rapid, took place, and then Randall's clothes were taken off him. He cried out, "Hold them, hold them, they are taken off me!" and added, "I cannot hold them; they are going, and I am going with them, there is something pushing me from inside, I am going, I am going, I'm gone!" A light was struck and Randall was seen to be in great terror and bathed in sweat. Randall, in the absence of Murphy, had felt strange phenomena, and likewise his room-mate, Mr. Sinnett. After having heard all night the sound of hurried footsteps, they lit the lamp, and then- "what added to our fright," he says, "was a chair dancing (!) in the middle of the floor without a thing near it." His bed and Sinnett's were raised into the air! (P. S. P. R., xxv, 1911, 380).

After Randall had left the house, nothing further occurred to him. It seems therefore that the phenomena could only be duced in a given locality and with a certain person. It would be important to know what degree of confidence can be placed in Randall, and up to what point he was normal

In the same issue (P. S. P. R., p. 397) Sir William Barrett giveu a methodical investigation of some other phenomena, which, though of but moderate intensity, derive interest from his testimony. He passed several nights in a haunted house at Derrygonnelly in Ireland about nine miles from Enniskillen. The phenomena seem to have been associated with Maggie, a girl of twenty, the daughter of Jack Flanigan, the owner of the house. When everybody was still, loud noises were heard on the walls, on the bedsteads, and on the doors. A large shovel fell on the bed and Sir William heard hammer-blows. He verified that these were intelligent; four times he got an exact answer to a number (between 1 and 10) which he mentally asked (probability 1 to 10,000).

The following case is remarkable from several points of view. The phenomena took place at Portland (Oregon) at the house of Mr. and Mrs. Savoyer, living at 546 Marshall Street with their grandson Elwin March, aged eleven. Two medical men and many other persons saw with their own eyes movements of heavy objects without contact. Chairs and telephones were displaced in open day, no one being near them. Nevertheless there is no doubt that the boy lent himself to these games. Dr. Gilbert of Portland got him to avow that he had played many tricks. A severe investigation seems to have proved that the trickery only began later and that some of the movements took place when March was not in the room. There is no incongruity in admitting the genuineness of the earlier phenomena and also young March's trickery, made possible when his movements were not watched. But however that may be, the fact of fraud, even subsequent fraud, makes the whole doubtful. Maxwell, who has studied deeply some of these phenomena, considers, I think correctly, that at the outset the telekinesis is real, but that the medium who at first produced them spontaneously simulates them afterwards. The story is given in Am. J. S. P. R., November, 1910.

Grasset (p. 396) verified, with Dr. Calmette, that the extraordinary displacements observed in a so-called haunted house ceased completely when the medium, a hysterical girl of fifteen, was sent for treatment to the hospital at Saint-Eloi (Montpellier).

In the A. S. P. (1919, xxix, p. 96) there is a story of extraordinary facts testified to by a Mr. X. and his nephew, two artists whose honour and good faith are not in doubt. Objects moved by themselves, metal boxes knocked together, furniture moved, nails drew out from the walls, pincers were heard mounting the stairs. This was in the department, Maine-et Loire and Sarthe. At Cannes a still more astounding thing came to pass: "A little man, formed like a key, a head of hair taking the place of the key-ring, appeared in the room... he came on the marble top of our night-table and seemed to sit down on it; when we tried to catch him he dodged as quickly as a mouse. On the next day this little sprite wore a blue costume with white spots. He always came to visit us, appearing from the radiator" (!!).

It is impossible to put any faith in these stories that Mr. X. and his nephew have illustrated with sketches more extravagant than anything in the Thousand and One Nights. Still, in matters metapsychic, so many strange phenomena have been denied and afterwards found to be true, that though I greatly desire formally to deny these insanities, I feel constrained to make some timid reserves in my bold denial.

The following incident took place in the jungle of Sumatra (/. S. P. /?., May, 1906, xii, 261). Mr. Grottendieck, alone with his native boy in a tent, was awakened by noises of stones falling round him. He lit his lamp and waked his boy who was sound asleep, and told him to find out the trickster or enemy. While the boy was outside, the stones continued to fall. He saw them slowly follow a parabolic course. He tried in vain to stop them; they avoided his hand. The boy came back saying there was no one, but the stones continued to fall. Mr. Grottendieck then fired five shots from his carbine from the window, but the stones still came. The servant was so frightened that he ran away into the jungle.

In a later letter Mr. Grottendieck says he is absolutely sure that his boy did not throw the stones; but is inclined to think that the slowness of their fall was an illusion, a mere semblance; for he says while the phenomenon took place, time seemed to be slowed down. "I feel now inclined to suggest that there might have been something abnormal in my own condition at the time."

This is highly probable, sufficiently so to deprive his testimony of all value.

I might multiply these poltergeist cases by citing many facts new and old, from many authors; but those I have given will suffice to show how obscure the matter still is. Before giving my personal opinion I will state in an abridged form the conclusions arrived at by Professor Barrett in his excellent article on haunted houses and poltergeists (P. S. P. R., xxv, 1911, 377):

1. Fraud and hallucination are not sufficient explanations of all the phenomena.

2. The noises, movements of objects, and other physical effects seem to be connected with an invisible intelligence, which, for all its imperfection, has some resemblance to human intelligence.

3. The phenomena are usually associated with a place or a person, so that some kind of fulcrum seems necessary to their production.

4. The phenomena are sporadic and temporary, lasting from a few days to a few months, beginning and ceasing without any known cause.



4. Conclusions

Before all things it is necessary to know if the facts are genuine; in presence of such extravagant phenomena theoretical discussions are of minor importance.

The testimonies are too precise for it to be possible to deny everything. Many of these cases, even when severely examined, establish that there have been movements of objects without contact, and more especially noises that no ordinary mechanical cause can explain. Is it not absurd to suppose that for weeks and months cool-headed and responsible persons, closely watching the so-called haunted house, have seen things that did not exist and heard loud and terrifying noises produced by no living being? If there were but one such case, and one such person, illusion or hallucination might be invoked; but that is a childish explanation. People say "hallucination" to dismiss a disquieting fact by a convenient word; this is much too simple.

Collective hallucination is next advanced. But in this sense there are no collective hallucinations. Alienists do not know of any such phenomena.

I am aware that hysterics in a convent have often told wonderful stories of what one and another claim to have seen; I know, too, that the inventions of myth-making hysterics have a large place in their psychology, but these witnesses are neither nuns nor hysterics.

It may be best to limit the recognized facts of haunting to accidental telekinesis.

Experimental telekinesis has been amply proved: then why not admit that the phenomena in haunted houses are of the same order, and that they are accidental phenomena of the same kind? That makes them neither more nor less mysterious.

The striking similarity of the facts verified in Normandy, in Ireland, in Scotland, in Georgia, in Russia, in Italy, and in Sicily shows that even these unusual facts show definite sequences. If they were purely fanciful the accounts would not be thus concordant.

In fact, all these matters belong to metapsychics. Formerly, from 1885 to 1895, the members of the S. P. R. were inclined to accept only telepathy as demonstrated and to deny clairvoyance (non-telepathic cryptesthesia) and also all physical phenomena. Podrr.ore in particular reached the conclusion that there was nothing genuine but telepathy. But little by little our learned colleagues of the S. P. R. have had to admit clairvoyance and physical phenomena. Short of wilful blindness, how can the facts produced by Home and Eusapia be denied?

Therefore, as experimental telekinesis is proved, accidental telekinesis must be admitted as being at least possible.

The principal objection advanced against accidental telekinesis is not hallucination but trickery. It is said that when there are strange noises and displacements of objects, these are due to the pranks of some vicious and malicious child who amuses himself by practising on the curiosity of observers. But only in exceptional cases can this hypothesis hold, for in most cases distrust was intense and progressive.1

I remember once being asked the naive question, "Have you thought that you may have been hoaxed?" This fear has been my chief, or even my only, anxiety throughout my experiments; and I cannot imagine that in a haunted house, when strident noises and cries are heard, when doors open and shut, that the sole concern of straightforward and sensible persons should not be to find out whether they are being hoaxed by some practical joker or some

*The justifiable severity shown in investigation can be seen by reading F. Podmore's criticism (P. S. P. R.t xv, 98) of the book, The Alleged Haunting of B. house, Redway, 1899, by Miss Goodrich Freer and the Marquis of Bute.

rogue who wants to rob them. Hallucination and trickery are two hypotheses that are the refuge of those who do not wish to admit the facts; for no one zvishes to admit them, and we naturally refuse to accept an unusual phenomenon. Nevertheless the unusual does occur. Once the facts are admitted, the next thing is to explain them; but their very strangeness defeats our endeavours.

When a phantom appears it seems natural to connect the fact with some old tragedy, or even with an apprehension of death that has survived its event. One is tempted to suppose an intention of the deceased to prove his presence. This, however, is probably a narrowly anthropomorphic notion; and rather than suppose the problematical survival of a human consciousness and vague symbolism of human intentions, I prefer to say without false shame that / do not understand. I therefore prefer to remain undecided, remarking that my indecision is not directed to the facts, but only to their explanation.

The stone-throwing, broken crockery, banging doors, and terrifying cries are all so absurd, from the human point of view, that the hypothesis of intention in the forces that produce this upset of domestic objects is ridiculous and deserves no further consideration.

All hypotheses apart, the facts that emerge from a study of hauntings may be summed up as follows:

1. In some places phantoms appear, sometimes to several persons in succession, sometimes collectively, keeping the same form for weeks, or even months together. This affirmation is not yet fully established and some scientific doubt is necessary.

2. In certain houses, usually without any phantom being perceptible, there are noises and movements of objects that cannot be explained rationally. Most frequently these phenomena are dependent upon some person who, perhaps without knowing or willing it, plays the part of medium. Just as a medium in a spiritist seance causes displacements of chairs and musical boxes, so mediums (who do not know themselves to be such) cause stones to fall and violent blows to be struck on the walls.

This second statement seems to me impossible to dispute.

In other words most phenomena of haunting are due to spontaneous telekinesis; but just because experimental telekinesis rests on indisputable proofs, for the same reason should spontaneous telekinesis, which rests on relatively infrequent and frail testimony, be subject to rigid criticism. The phenomena of haunting cannot be denied; we must even admit that they are very probably true. But to say that they are probably true is to say that they are not certain. Of all metapsychic phenomena these are the most questionable.

We might even feel constrained to deny them resolutely were it not that they are buttressed by the absolutely certain facts of ectoplasms, premonitions, telekinesis, and monitions.



Book IV. Conclusion



I

I have now reached the end of this long investigation. I have endeavoured, while giving a place, possibly too large a place, to my own researches, to collect the documentary evidence very widely scattered in many records, and to put some order into a matter which up to the present has never been synthetically studied. I have tried to extricate the sciences anathematized as occult from the chaos in which they were involved, and to put in a clear light knowledge that official science, in the pride of its reputation, has refused to consider. It has seemed to me that the time has come to claim for metapsychics a place among recognized sciences by making it conform to the rigour and the logical treatment which have given them their authority

Scientific men will be surprised, and perhaps indignant. But if they have the wisdom — the elementary wisdom, as it seems to me — to consent to read this long and laborious study, they will be obliged to give way before the evidence.

My intention will be evident from the contents of the book. I have desired, while eliminating as far as possible everything notoriously uncertain, and expressly stating my doubts as to certain experiments, to present facts and observations, for these are the foundation of every science.

Finally, it has appeared to me, as it will doubtless appear to every impartial reader, that there are too many well-verified facts and rigorously conducted experiments that chance, illusion, or fraud should always be attributed to all these facts and experiments without exception.

But as the facts are very strange and the experiments seem to clash so often with current scientific dogmas, the affirmations made will give rise to strongly adverse criticism and to mocking incredulity. This is the lot of all new ideas, and it moves me not at all. I only hope, and surely this is not asking too much, that I shall not be condemned unread. No one can form a serious and considered opinion worthy of respect by casually turning over the leaves of a book that sums up the labours of two hundred honest and skilful workers. I would like to say to my critics, as did Themistocles, "Strike, but listen."

It troubles me more than in the camp of those who are not sceptical I shall meet with very strong opposition. On the one hand I have been willing to narrate many surprising facts admitted by spiritualists, and on the other hand I have not felt able to adopt their theories; for I have always sought to plant my feet firmly on the earth and have preferred a rationalist explanation even when it seems improbable. And, frankly, my position causes me some pain.

In very many cases the spiritist hypothesis is obviously absurd — absurd because it is superfluous — and again absurd because it assumes that human beings of very moderate intelligence survive the destruction of the brain. All the same, in certain cases — rare indeed, but whose significance I do not disguise — there are, apparently at least, intelligent and reasoned intentions, forces, and wills in the phenomena produced; and the power has all the character of extraneous energy (see p. 352, children's death-beds).

In these cases the spiritualist explanation is much the simplest; or, if some will not hear of that, the hypothesis that there are intelligent beings that interpose in our lives and can exercise some power over matter.

I do not seek to attenuate the bearing of these facts; but I cannot adopt the inference that there are spirits — intelligences outside human intelligence. My inference is a different one; it is that the human personality has both material and psychological ponrrs that we do not know.

And as this hypothesis by no means satisfies me, I will add, as a final remark, that in our present state of knowledge we are not in a position to understand.



II

Our evolution takes place in the midst of the unknown; but nevertheless two leading facts have been placed beyond doubt:

I, The human mind has other sources of cognition than the normal senses — cryptesthesia.

2. There are materializations— powers that, emerging from the body, can take form and act as if they were material bodiesectoplasms.

It seems to me that we can go no farther than cryptesthesia and ectoplasms without being lost in mists.

What amazing stories I have heard, told me by witnesses of unquestionable good faith! But they had observed with greater enthusiasm than critical accuracy, and when the matter concerns highly improbable facts we cannot be satisfied with half proofs, with experiments that are almost conclusive, or inferences that are nearly certain. I have not included these allegations in my book, even when I have reason to think them not unfounded. I have not busied myself with problematical narratives, so that while some may think me too credulous, many will think me too severely critical.

Movement without contact, clairvoyance, phantoms, and premonitions are so very unusual that when wre first hear of them we are inclined to laugh at them. Till we have studied them we laugh and deny. This was my state of mind for a very long time as it was that of Crookes, Lombroso, Russel Wallace, Zollner, Oliver Lodge, Morselli, and Bottazzi, and I shall therefore be in no way surprised should my account of parallel facts provoke incredulity and mockery. The less attention is given to reading, the greater will be the disposition to ridicule.

Moreover, it is not argument that will bring conviction. Even severe mathematical demonstration does not always convince. We must be accustomed to a phenomenon before zve can accept it.1



III

Perhaps — and I admit it — the innumerable experiments published by eminent men of science would not have convinced me, had I not been a witness of the four fundamental facts of metapsychics. I was an unwilling witness, in no way enthusiastic, very critical, extremely distrustful of the facts that forced themselves upon me. I was able to verify, under unexceptionable conditions

*M. Thiers, ex-president of the French Parliament, having determined to acquire a knowledge of mathematics in his old age, rebelled when his teacher showed him that the section of any cone at any angle with the axis showed a regular ellipse. "Not possible," he said. "When a sugar-loaf is cut obliquely, there must be a big and a little end." Not till an actual sugar-loaf had been brought and cut would he admit conviction.

and despite my desire to disprove them, the four essential facts of metapsychics.

These four personal experiences, all four of which carry obvious proof, determined my belief, and that not at once, but after long consideration, meditation, and repetition:

A. Cryptesthesia. Stella, in presence of G., whose family she does not and cannot have known, gave the first names of his son, of his wife, of a deceased brother, of a living brother, of his father-in-law, and of the locality where he lived as a child.

B. Telekinesis. While Eusapia's head and hands were held, a large melon weighing six pounds was moved from the sideboard to the table, the distance between them being over a yard.

C. Ectoplasms. Eusapia was in half light, her left hand in my right and her right in my left tightly held, and before Lodge, Myers, and Ochorowicz, a third hand stroked my face, pinched my nose, pulled my hair, and gave a smack on my shoulder heard by Ochorowicz, Myers, and Lodge.

D. Premonitions. Alice, at 2 p.m. told me, for the first and only time, that I should soon give way to violent anger before one, two, three persons whom she designated with her hand as if she saw them. At 6 p.m. the unlikely and unforeseeable impertinence of a person absolutely unknown to Alice provoked me to one of the strongest and most justifiable fits of anger of my whole life before two other persons, an anger that led to my receiving a challenge to a duel, the only one I have ever received.

These four experiences, by their precision and faultlessness, sufficed, if not to produce conviction, at least the beginnings of conviction. As will be obvious, from reading the book, I have had many other proofs, but in this summary I mention only one of the most characteristic of each kind.



IV

These four personal experiences amount to nothing, just nothing, compared with the multiple proofs that other men of science have brought forward. An edifice cannot be built on four little stones, however solid they may be; and the reader who has not, like me, had the happy opportunity of similar experiences will require proofs, if not stronger, at any rate more numerous, and will need other testimony than mine.

Testimony is abundant and proofs innumerable. Decisive proofs are repeated daily. In this book, which is a collection of facts rather than an exposition of doctrine, I have intentionally multiplied instances at the risk of producing weariness and boredom. The authority of the witnesses and the mass of repeated proofs are such that doubt is not warranted. Cryptesthesia, telekinesis, ectoplasms, and premonition seem to me founded on granite; that is to say, on hundreds of exact observations and hundreds of rigorous experiments. The thing is a certainty; and even though among these thousands of observations there may be defects, gaps, errors, and illusions, sometimes mistakes of testimony, occasionally trickeries, more often casual coincidence, still more often ill-considered assertions, still the thing is certain. It is not possible that all these observers should never have made mistakes, but the whole constitutes a sheaf of testimony so large and homogeneous, that no criticism of details, however acute, will be able to disintegrate and disperse. Therefore:

1. There is in us a faculty of cognition that differs radically from the usual sensorial faculties (Cryptesthesia).

2. There are, even in full light, movements of objects without contact (Telekinesis).

3. Hands, bodies, and objects seem to take shape in their entirety from a cloud and take all the semblance of life (Ectoplasms).

4. There occur premonitions that can be explained neither by chance nor perspicacity, and are sometimes verified in minute detail. Such are my firm and explicit conclusions. I cannot go beyond them.



V

Thus it seems to me that the general conclusions of metapsychics are rigorously true. I even go so far as to think that many phenomena indicated in this book as still doubtful (for when proof has seemed to me less than rigorous I have suspected and gone near to denying them) may soon be recognized as authentic. Metapsychic science will go much farther than I have ventured to think. I have wished to err on the side of prudence, accepting only that which has been proved, and well proved, twenty times or more. Official scientists will certainly find me too credulous; still more certainly spiritualists and occultists will find me terribly sceptical.

To imagine that all metapsychics are but illusion is to suppose that William Crookes, A. R. Wallace, Lombroso, Zollner, F. W. H. Myers, Oliver Lodge, Aksakoff, J. Ochorowicz, J. Maxwell, Boutleroff, Du Prel, William James, Morselli, Bottazzi, Bozzano, Flammarion, A. de Rochas, A. de Gramont, Schrenck-Notzing, and William Barrett were all, without exception, liars or imbeciles; it is to suppose that two hundred distinguished observers less eminent, perhaps, but persons of high and acute intelligence, were also liars or imbeciles.



VI

Why should men of science, whether mathematicians, chemists, or physiologists, oppose cryptesthesia and ectoplasms? Are these new facts in contradiction with the old facts?

I lay stress on this, because men do not distinguish sufficiently between a contradiction and a new affirmation.

Nothing in metapsychics is in contradiction with official science; but there are new affirmations.

Psycho-physiology teaches that cognizance of things reaches us through our senses; that if the retina is excited there is a visual sensation; if Corti's membrane, an auditive one. But psychophysiology has never attempted to demonstrate, and could never demonstrate, that no other (unusual) channels of cognition can exist. It would be a contradiction to say that excitation of the retina does not produce a visual image, but it is not a contradiction to maintain that there may be a visual image without retinal excitation.

In other words, Science establishes positive facts, and there she is all-powerful. She is not, however, justified in formulating one single negation, for at every moment she is confronted by profound mysteries. Therefore when new facts supported by many irrefragable proofs are brought forward, the new facts being positive facts that do not contradict the old positive facts, lovers of truth ought to bow before them and receive them joyfully.

Taken for all in all nothing is simpler than cryptesthesia; no more need be accepted than that the human mind has means of cognition other than our five poor senses. This is not an extraordinarily bold assertion, and cannot be rejected a priori. To deny this a priori is to dare to assert that those five poor senses delimit the knowable.

The case for ectoplasms and telekinesis is the same. No more need be accepted than that in the immensity of the Cosmos there may be intelligent energies (human or non-human) that can act on matter. This also is not a very rash hypothesis. What is rash is not to suppose that such forces exist, but to affirm that they do not.

What man of science worthy of the name could affirm that science has classified, analyzed, and penetrated all the energies of immeasurable nature, or could make the strange and pretentious claim that we know all the dynamic manifestations in the world! A mere glance over the list of possible vibrations of the Ether, itself a hypothesis and a mystery, shows many of which we know nothing; and is it not foolish to aver that all the phenomena in the universe can be only vibrations of Ether?

To admit telekinesis and ectoplasms is not to destroy even the smallest fragment of science; it is but to admit new data, and that there are unknown energies. Then why be indignant, when, on the basis of thousands of observations and experiments, we affirm one of those unknown energies?

Everything that is not in formal contradiction with known facts is possible. Well, materializations and telekinesis do not contradict one single established scientific fact. That a hand having all the attributes of a living hand should be formed from a whitish cloud in no way nullifies the laws of circulation, nutrition, and structure of a normal hand. It is new fact but not a contradictory one.



VII

It is true that in this terrifying science of metapsychics there is one fact more terrible than others — Premonition. This is established by sure proofs, but it is incomprehensible by us. Our psychological constitution forbids the concept that future events are as determinate as past events, and that inexorable fatality regulates human and non-human affairs shown to the smallest detail. We shall not seek to explore farther into this abyss. Unquestionably premonition is not in contradiction with scientific data; but (and this is perhaps more formidable) it clashes strongly with our consciousness, for that consciousness refuses to admit the inevitability of that which is yet to come.

We shall therefore attempt neither explanation nor justification of premonitions. We shall keep within the boundary of positive facts; establishing these without concerning ourselves with the inferences they involve and without deducing nebulous theories. Our function is to know what actually is, not what is possible. Sir William Crookes so stated the problem, and we shall follow his lead.



VIII

We have demonstrated the reality of the facts, but this is only a first step. A fact by itself is a small thing unless it be linked logically with homologous facts, so that a coherent relation with seemingly disparate phenomena emerges to view with an outline at least of a tenable theory. We are therefore constrained, the facts being demonstrated, to discuss theories if only to discover the profound significance of the facts.

We shall be brief, though innumerable ponderous volumes have been written on metapsychic theories.

At the outset it must be laid down that in order to construct a complete theory of metapsychics it is not sufficient to establish one that satisfies cryptesthesia, another for telekinesis, and a third for ectoplasms. Any tenable theory must give some sort of synthetic explanation of all three. The more we study the complex details of these phenomena, the closer their connection is seen to be.

Many scientific men, notably the distinguished members of the S. P. R. (especially F, Podmore and H. Sidgwick) thought at first that everything could be reduced to telepathy; that is, in final analysis, to a cerebral vibration in an individual A, corresponding to a cerebral vibration in another individual, B. According to them telepathy explained everything. But today Sir William Barrett and Sir Oliver Lodge think quite otherwise.

Telepathy is a phenomenon whose extent may be fantastically exaggerated. Distance counts for nothing, and an emotion in A may be transmitted to B, even if there is a thousand miles between them. And moreover for this transmission to occur it is not necessary that either A or B should be conscious of the vibrations that move their minds. Will and consciousness have no part in the phenomena; it suffices that an ancient memory of which it is entirely ignorant should be buried in A's consciousness for it to be transmitted to B. The consciousness of both may equally be unaware of the whole proceeding. This clearing-house is in the subconsciousness.

If all that is claimed for telepathy is to be accepted, the full implications of this ambitious but frail theory must be realized. Since a human thought, however unconscious, however distant, or however ancient, can react upon another human thought, it suffices that as soon as B experiences an emotion or a cognition, there should be anywhere on this planet another person, A, having the same emotion or cognition, to explain that of B. It follows that telepathy can always, or nearly always, be invoked, and that A, however indifferent, however distant, or however unconscious he may be, has transmitted this emotion to B. The facts that are or have been unknown to any living person are few indeed.

This theory seems to me dangerously exclusive. In several of the preceding chapters, instances of super-normal consciousness (cryptesthesia) have been given that cannot be explained by telepathy.

In the first place, premonitions, without exception. In these there is no room for telepathy, since neither A nor B can know the future by ordinary means.

But even outside premonitions there are sometimes astonishing divinations, reproductions of drawings taken at random from among many others, and cognitions of words that no one knows of. Drawings in an envelope have been presented to a sensitive for reproduction, and occasionally (the experiment being then still more rigorous) the experimenter has been unaware of the contents of the envelope, so that no person living or dead knows the particular design to be guessed by B. Second-sight, lucidity, clairvoyance (hellsehcn), cryptesthesia, as I prefer to call it, are therefore actualities that telepathy cannot explain. In the numerous experiments with Mrs. Piper many curious and very precise details were given on distant families, details that were unknown to the persons questioning Mrs. Piper.

To read the many accounts of monitions given above is to perceive that in at least one-third of the cases, telepathy (even allowing it an extreme and almost absurd extension) does not suffice to explain the cognition sometimes shown by a sensitive of things that no normal intelligence could be aware of.

Far from denying telepathy we strongly affirm that it exists, and even that it is one of the most incontestable facts of metapsychology. An emotion, a thought, and (more extraordinary still) a name, a number, or a drawing can be transmitted from A to B. If, as it seems to me, cryptesthesia is the cognition of the actual, then human thought, being itself an actuality, can provoke cryptesthesia.

Telepathy is therefore only a particular case of cryptesthesia. I even think that among the unknown vibrations that bring cryptesthesia into action, human thought is one of those that can most easily be transmitted.

If the word telepathy is held to mean that there is synchronous and synergetic vibrations of two human thoughts, it is a hypothesis. Cryptesthesia, on the contrary, is not a hypothesis. It is a word indicating a fact. Truth to tell, it is nothing but a word, since it signifies a means of cognition unknown to us. But till the true theory comes, the fact must suffice.

In any case, telepathy presupposes cryptesthesia, since the faculty that enables it to receive the vibrations of another's thought implies a new and incomprehensible function. That a drawing known to A, enclosed in an opaque envelope, should be reproduced by B is entirely mysterious, and the mystery is no deeper if A holding the drawing has no idea what it may be; perhaps, indeed, the mental vibration of A in visualizing a drawing is actually, in itself, more obscure than the clear outlines of a drawing locked away in a box.

After all, it does not signify whether one or the other difficulty is the greater — the facts are there, the brutal facts, ordering us to accept botli cryptesthesia and telepathy. All that can be conceded is that telepathy is a special and frequent case of cryptesthesia.



IX

When we speak of a mysterious faculty of cognition, saying no more, we do but state our ignorance: and this ignorance is coextensive with cryptesthesia; we cannot assign limits to it.

Mrs. Piper speaks to Mrs. Verrall of an Aunt Susan, born in 1791, who had in her house a portrait of her son painted in oils. This was a fact that Mrs. Verrall did not know and never had known. How did this precise and insignificant fact reach Mrs. Piper's mind? A hypothesis has been put forward that so-called inert things emit special vibrations, emanations of some kind, which excite cryptesthesia in sensitives, though they do not affect the normal senses.

The emanations from subterranean springs or metals moving the dowser's rod are good examples of this. Since there is one rhabdic force some of whose laws are known, why should there not be others?

A ring worn by Martin's grandmother has retained some effluvia of this woman so that the sensitive to whom this ring is given will say something about her — a name, a detail of her dress, a long-forgotten accident, a trait of character. This has been called psychometry, a very incorrect term, to which I prefer "pragmatic cryptesthesia," meaning a sensibility to emanations from things.

It is quite possible that there may be emanations from things; but in many cases lucidity comes into play without (apparently) any material object to awaken it. If, for some few cases of haunting, it may be supposed that the objects in a house have retained, as it were, a vapour emanating from those who have dwelt in it, this supposition is very far from accounting for all the phenomena, and the hypothesis applies only to a very few particular cases.

The hypothesis of emanations is perhaps partially applicable, but is nearly always inadequate; it may help to explain some cases, but for most of the phenomena of cryptesthesia it is inoperative.



X

As a second hypothesis, it may be supposed that sometimes the normal human senses may attain a prodigious acuity; so that visual sensibility may become so sharp as to distinguish clearly a drawing in an opaque envelope, or auditory sensibility may become so keen as to hear the ticking of a watch 600 miles away.

This hyperesthesia is not altogether absurd; it would only be an extraordinary extension of a normal faculty, and there are some very rare cases of cryptesthesia that seem of a kind best to be explained by superacuity of the senses, or perhaps of their transposition. But in most cases no sensorial hyperesthesia, however great, would cover the facts, for there is very much more than vision and audition at a distance.



XI

A third and very simple hypothesis now presents itself. It has been adopted from the first with unreflecting enthusiasm. It is that the mind of the sensitive is invaded, possessed, and replaced by another mind — that of a deceased person whose intelligence and consciousness are not dead. George Pelham after his death continues to exist as a spirit, which then speaks by the brain, the larynx, and the lips of Mrs. Piper, who is the intermediary (medium) between the world of the living and the world of the dead.

We have now come to the spiritist hypothesis.

It is neither to be desired nor feared. When we devote ourselves to the high task of seeking pure truth, we ought not to be intimidated by the opinion of the crowd, nor allured by any obscure desire for personal immortality.

The spiritist theory, disencumbered from superstitions that weaken it, may be expressed in a few words.

"The human mind is not annihilated at the moment of death. It continues to evolve in a world that is not conditioned by space and time. This mind, retaining some of the characteristics that it had during life — its individuality, its consciousness, and its personality— can manifest itself through certain privileged living persons, by taking possession of their body (brain, muscles, and nerves); it then writes, sees, thinks, and speaks as in the time when it was incarnate in flesh. The minds of the dead know things near and far, past, present, or even future. They can speak languages unknown to their medium, can compose verses, solve problems, and discuss questions, when the medium, left to himself, would be incapable of composing those verses, solving those problems, or discussing those questions. The consciousness of the Self has not disappeared; for there is no true survival without consciousness of the Self.

"Thus, when the consciousness of George Pelham is substituted for that of Mrs. Piper, Mrs. Piper knows all that the discarnate knew. When George Pelham takes possession there is no more Mrs. Piper; there is only George Pelham.

"To account for all that George Pelham does by 'lucidity' is to give lucidity an enormous and improbable extension; it is simpler to make one single hypothesis — the survival of George Pelham, and his incarnation in Mrs. Piper.

"Since man does not die, he cannot be born. It follows that there is no birth for minds (Allan Kardec). Discarnate minds are incorporate in children who have just been born. Till then they wander in the world, in the Beyond, painfully seeking to manifest, sometimes incarnating in young children about to be born, sometimes acting through mediums."

"There is no death," said Florence Marryat. "On ne meurt pas/' wrote Chevreul.

The hypothesis is frank and clear. By conferring omniscience on spirits it explains most of the facts, but it involves so many improbabilities that, despite its seeming simplicity, I find myself unable to adopt it. Nevertheless I oppose it half-heartedly, for I am quite unable to bring forward any wholly satisfactory countertheory.

1. Everything seems to prove that the intelligence is a function of the brain, that it depends on the integrity of the cerebral mechanism, and on the volume and quality of the blood that irrigates it.

It is possible, it is even probable, that there may exist in nature other intelligences under other conditions than the physical conditions of terrestrial life; but they would no longer be human intelligences. Consequently, should they desire to enter into relations with us, they would pity our coarse but inevitable anthropomorphism, and, in order to be understood, would have to clothe themselves in human names and human sentiments. But they would not belong to humanity, since the mind, whether human or animal, can possess the human psychological characteristics of consciousness, memory, sensibility, reason, and will only if the brain exists. Thousands and thousands.of experiments establish so close a relation between the brain as organ and intelligence as function, that it is as impossible to admit the persistence of the function (mind) without the organ (brain) as the renal secretion without the kidney.

2. The word "survival" means survival of consciousness; for in the absence of consciousness and memory, survival has no interest for us. We are well aware that the atoms of carbon, phosphorus, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur that make up our bodies are immortal, but what is that to us? The animistic survival of some hypothetical vital force or soul, if the memory of my Self has vanished, concerns me no more than the survival of the phosphorus in my brain. Now innumerable facts have proved that memory is a function that very soon disappears, that asphyxia, anaemia, and poisons impair it immediately; it is extremely frail; it diminishes rapidly with advancing age. To survive without remembrance of the old Self is not to survive at all.

And what is it that is to survive? Will the old man who has fallen into second childhood have the Self of his intellectual prime or the Self of his decrepitude? Will the Self of a person who stammered continue to stammer in the Beyond? What puerility!

Materlinck has expressed this in admirable words, "This 1/ so uncertain, so fugitive, and so precarious, evading all definition, is so entirely the centre of our being, and interests us so exclusively, that all the realities of life fade when confronted with that phantasm. If remembrance of certain facts, nearly always insignificant, does not accompany us... it is nothing to me that the highest, freest, and noblest parts of my mind should shine, living and eternal, in supreme bliss; they are not Me; I do not know them. Death has cut the links of nerves, or the memories that bound them to that unknown central point at which I feel myself complete."

This does not signify negation of any intelligent energies apart from a brain; but such hypothetical intelligent forces, independent of a material substratum, have nothing in common with human minds.

3. There are all degrees between the almost perfect re-constitution of a vanished human personality such as George Pelham (though this is very rare and G. P.'s case nearly unique) and the creation of obviously factitious personalities, which is very common and frequently observed.

I suggest to A. that she is a little girl named Madelon Martin, neither the name nor personality having any reality except in my fancy, and forthwith she becomes Madelon Martin. If by chance a Madelon Martin has existed, or still exists, and A. has known her, she will at once reproduce her characteristics with marvellous fidelity. What is, then, the cause for surprise if, by some unforeseen auto-suggestion, Mrs. Piper has thought herself to be George Pelham, and then, by her wonderful powers of cryptesthesia, she should reproduce the tastes, the intonations, the passions, and the remembrances of George Pelham?

Assuredly if George Pelham was never known to A., and she faithfully reproduces his thought, we must ascribe to A. intense and amazing powers of cryptesthesia. (This is permissible, for its limits are unknown.) Then the personality of George Pelham will seem to be reconstituted integrally, and yet this personality, in spite of his reiterated affirmations, may be as factitious as the others. Perhaps this personification of George Pelham is due only to a splendid and far-reaching lucidity.

As all degrees of personification are observed, the manifesting personalities rarely or never show such strong individuality as did George Pelham, so conformable to the actual person who lived. Sometimes, as in the case of Phinuit, G. P.'s predecessor, the personalities produced are imaginary. John King is probably a fanciful creation of Eusapia; and Rector, Imperator, and Mentor are fanciful creations of Stainton Moses. The queerest personalities can easily be evoked by hypnotic suggestions. The only difference between the somnambule and the medium is that while the actions

-ptnUPCLCqtuO

3*.

Lm Syndic,

Fig. 25. — Comparison of the authentic signatures of the Syndic Chaumontet and the Cure Burnier with those written by Helen Smith. The top and bottom lines are from Helen's hand.

(After Flournoy, he. cit., p. 409.)

of the former are due to the verbal suggestion of the magnetizer, those of the latter are due to an auto-suggestion whose origin is unknown. Since it is impossible to accept as authentic the childish personifications of common hypnotism, why should we accept those that are a little more perfect? The transition from the one to the other is gradual; where are we to stop? What criterion have we for saying "This one is true, that is imaginary?" We see so many that are obviously imaginary that we can scarcely avoid the inference that all are.

The ease and frequency with which factitious personalities are produced renders the production of real personifications very doubtful.

We may hesitate a moment when Helen accurately reproduces Burnier's signature, for she signs like Burnier, whose writing she has doubtless never seen; but she also incarnates Cagliostro and Marie Antoinette! Why, then, should the personification of Burnier be more real than that of Marie Antoinette, of Cagliostro, of an Indian prince, or any other of the manifestly imaginary creations? The similitude of writing need not trouble us; for there is nothing to show that cryptesthesia may not extend even to that: Helen Smith sees before her the signature of Burnier by her cryptesthesia and then she imagines herself to be Burnier in virtue of the natural tendency of mediums to impersonate.

T. Flournoy, to whom we owe an admirable study of Helen Smith, does not even go so far as to admit cryptesthesia. He supposes that there is a revival of an old remembrance, and thinks (without, however, advancing any proof) that Helen Smith must have seen a signature of Burnier at some time or other. In order to reach this point he is obliged to make a long series of unlikely suppositions. It seems to me more reasonable to admit cryptesthesia, proved by thousands of observations and experiments, and extremely probable in an excellent medium like Helen Smith.

Therefore though I hold the opinion of Flournoy in much respect, I cannot agree that the name and the signature of Burnier are to be accounted for by accumulated and forgotten impressions. It seems to me a phenomenon of lucidity. But I shall not infer incarnation because there is lucidity.

Highly also as I esteem the opinions of my distinguished friend, Sir Oliver Lodge, I cannot think survival the most probable explanation in Raymond's case. It seems, on the contrary, that if flashes of lucidity are admitted (and the reality of lucidity is not disputed) and also symbolization; if it is recognized that mediums have an invincible tendency to reconstitute former personalities, we come in the end to less improbable hypotheses than that of survival.

4. Cryptesthesia comes into play without any necessity for supposing that a discarnate human being is speaking by the voice or writing by the hand of the medium. Details about living persons have been furnished which in no way imply the existence of a vanished entity. When Mrs. Thompson sees the word Carqueiranne on the forehead of M. Moutonnier it is unnecessary to suppose that Nelly showed her this. The hypothesis that Nelly has survived serves no purpose. Nelly is an imaginary being who greatly facilitates experiment, but is not necessary to it; it is scarcely a working hypothesis, since this complication is not required. Mrs. Thompson on taking my son's watch says, "Three generations mingled." Nelly is speaking, but Nelly is only a symbol; the reality is Mrs. Thompson speaking and using her fine faculty of cryptesthesia; there is no need to bring in the personality of her granddaughter.

Phinuit, speaking by the voice of Mrs. Piper, has given extraordinary instances of cryptesthesia, as good as, if not better than, those of George Pelham, but Phinuit is obviously a creation of Mrs. Piper's mind. There was never any French doctor at Metz by the name of Phinuit. Phinuit never existed; he is Mrs. Piper. George Pelham, who is neither more nor less lucid than Phinuit, is Mrs. Piper in a lucid state. Then everything that she knows by cryptesthesia about George Pelham, who once existed but whose consciousness vanished when his heart ceased to beat, crystallizes round this personality of George Pelham.

5. When these entities manifest they make mistakes, trifle so childishly, forget so much, and show such reticences, that it is impossible to suppose that the spirit of a deceased person has returned.

It is true that there is nothing that obliges us to attribute to the personalities of the departed the same feelings, the same modes of reasoning, and the same judgments that they had on earth. But then the resemblance of sentiments and reasonings verified in certain cases must not be brought into the argument, since in the majority of instances this resemblance is outrageously wanting. These personages take pleasure in absurd jokes and childish plays on words, and make up sentences that resemble puns. I do not know who it was that said, "If survival involves having the mentality of a discarnate, I prefer not to survive." These are rags and tatters of intelligence, and, with few exceptions, of a low-grade intelligence. These discarnates have forgotten essential things and busy themselves with minutiae to which they would not have given a moment during life. That one should come back to earth to speak of a sleeve-link is not merely feeble; it has no likelihood at all. This is a strong argument against the spiritist doctrine.

This poor spiritist personality is not in any way incoherent; it is simply low grade and very low grade, being, with few exceptions, much below average intelligence; but it remains consistently the same for many months — infantile like Feda and Nelly; facetious like Vincenzo; erudite and mystical like Myers P.; jovial like Phinuit.

The rejoinder is made that the relation of spirits to a human brain is probably not very easy; that the brain of the medium is an imperfect instrument, and the incoherences are due to want of co-ordination between the instrument and he who plays on it. But what a mass of hypotheses and symbolical interpretations, bristling with obscurities and fancies, in order to evade the evidence that the psychological personality of the discarnate is quite different from that of the person during his life-time.

Not only is this psychological personality different from what it was in life, but it is nearly always notoriously inferior at any rate from our anthropomorphic point of view.

Everything can be very simply explained if we admit that there is never anything whatever at work but the thoughts of the medium, a being very human indeed and exclusively human, whose subconscious mental operations are rudimentary, and, so to say, amorphous. In our simplicity we think we hear the words of a discarnate, when in fact we are witnessing the waves of subconsciousness grouping themselves round a fictitious personality.

6. Another characteristic of spiritist personalities is that they shroud themselves in mystery; as if the mystery of their presence were not enough. There are reticences, implications, and veiled allusions that need much sagacity to understand. At certain times they seem to know a great deal, and then when becoming most interesting, they suddenly stop and go wandering. It may legitimately be inferred that if they do not tell more it is because they do not know more. They rarely give a plain answer to a plain question. If they were before a board of examiners they would not pass, for they answer badly and not to the point.

That is doubtless the reason — disastrous to the spiritist hypothesis— why nothing has been revealed by deceased personalities that was not already known to the generality of mankind. They have not helped us to a single step forward in geometry, in physics, in physiology, or even in metaphysics. They have never been able to prove that they know more than the ordinary man on any subject soever. No unexpected discovery has been indicated; no revelation has been made. The answers, with the rarest exceptions, are desperately commonplace. Not the smallest atom of scientific knowledge has been anticipated.

There are wonderful imitations of style, such as Dickens's romance, and the verses of Moliere dictated to Victor Hugo. But a parody is not authorship. It is clever literary work, but it does not come from a Beyond. The human intelligence that composes this prose and verse is in no way beyond human powers. It is not the semi-divine inspiration that we might expect from spirits.

The lucidity of some mediums is amazing, but lucidity is not survival. Survival implies the continuance of personal consciousness. F. Myers lived on the earth; he was himself and no other, with intentions, habits, tastes, thoughts, remembrances, hopes, and an intelligence which made him a definite personality very different from all others. But when Mrs. Verrall's hand writes, "I am Myers," or Mrs. Piper's voice says, "I am Myers," it is useless to try to find vague or even exact analogies between Myers V., or Myers P., with the real Myers; even if such analogies are discoverable, they are not enough to prove that, independently of Mrs. Verrall or Mrs. Piper or any other lucid medium, there is somewhere in space a human consciousness that says "1" identical with the consciousness of our greatly regretted friend, and retaining his primordial intellectual character and coherent remembrances as we knew him at Leckhampton House.

