All the indications transmitted by discarnates on their actual, material, or psychological state inspire me with very limited confidence, for it is needful first of all to prove that there are any discarnates. I do not share the robust faith of one of Sir A. Conan Doyle's correspondents, Mr. Hubert Wales, who writes with simple anthropomorphism, that spirits "have bodies, which, though imperceptible by our senses, are as solid to them as ours are to us... that they have no age, no pain, no rich and poor; that they wear clothes and take nourishment; that they do not sleep, though they spoke of passing occasionally into a semi-conscious state... that people of similar thoughts, tastes, and feelings gravitate together; that married couples do not necessarily reunite..." (The New Revelation, Conan Doyle, p. 148).

I cannot, alas! share the deep convictions of my large-minded friend, W. Stead, who, when I went to see him after he had lost his son, said to me, "Why should I be sad? I wrote to him this morning and he will answer me this evening. He is quite happy and we are in daily relations as formerly."

In my humble opinion proof of survival has not been given by subjective metapsychics, but I hasten to add that a near approach to that proof has been made. If proof of surviving consciousness could have been given it would have been given.

Can such proof be given? I really do not see what better arguments can be furnished than the cases of George Pelham and Raymond Lodge; and I cannot imagine any experiments that would be more decisive, or any observations that would carry more weight.

Truth to tell — and one must be as cautious in denial as in assertion— some facts tend to make us believe strongly in the survival of vanished personalities. Why should mediums, even when they have read no spiritualist books, and are unacquainted with spiritualist doctrines, proceed at once to personify some deceased person or other? Why does the new personality affirm itself so persistently, so energetically, and sometimes with so much verisimilitude? Why does it separate itself so sharply from the personality of the medium? All the words of powerful mediums are pregnant, so to say, with the theory of survival. These are semblances, perhaps, but why should the semblances be there?

These hesitations must be forgiven me. On the threshold of a mystery we may well be troubled and decline to use trenchant words and peremptory phrases in ludicrous contrast with our inner painful uncertainty.

If we had nothing to go upon but subjective metapsychics we might stop at cryptesthesia as a simple and necessary hypothesis covering everything. Let us therefore admit, as the only fully demonstrated proposition, that there actually is an intense form of cryptesthesia, defined by unmeasured powers of cognition, and a sensibility of the soul to subtle vibrations that none of our physical instruments can reveal.

There is, then, no need to call in the intervention of external energies and my inference will be — the human mind is much more powerful and more sensitive than we know or think.



XII

The hypothesis involved is very simple; to admit an extension of our intellectual powers is scarcely a hypothesis at all. But we can go no farther, for the more we try to analyze this inaccessible faculty of cryptesthesia, the less we understand it. Telepathy, superacuity of the senses, actual emanations — if these explain some of the phenomena they do not account for anywhere near all of them; and we must recognize that we know only the effects, and not the cause of cryptesthesia: its modalities and its mechanism escape us entirely.

The transition from subjective to objective phenomena is not so abrupt as might be thought; for to produce a cryptesthetic sensation there must be some external phenomenon, probably a vibration, since energy is transmitted by vibrations. (Of the Ether?) If, then, a notion arises due to cryptesthesia some external power must have been in action.

Monitions, of death or any other, can be accounted for only by a vibration of some unknown kind impinging upon our subconsciousness. There must therefore be some external thing that has acted upon us. This external thing which moves the subconscious Self is objective; our instruments register nothing, but it is objective all the same.

Then we have to consider that strange power of symbolization, which is one of the corner-stones in metapsychic science.

In order that any notion may be understood by us, it must take a form comprehensible by our conscious mind. For instance an announcement of the death of A will only be understood by the consciousness of B if conveyed by some intelligible representation. Then the truncated and barely outlined notion that A is dead is visualized as a phantom, or externalized as a voice, and many details are added, sometimes incoherent, but sometimes very synthetic, that complete the embryonic idea. These symbols that one is tempted to take for realities have no reality in themselves; they are but the translation by a symbol of the particular notion that arouses the cryptesthesia.

Even when, as in a haunted house, the same personage appears to different persons successively under the same form, this does not prove that there is a real external phantom. It is possibly because the symbolization has been exercised in the same way by two different percipients. In all this we are only talking in hypotheses.

I do not allow myself to be deceived by the mirage presented by words. Cryptesthesia is a word that does not even hide our ignorance. To say that cryptesthesia exists does not in any way solve the very troubling questions that we cannot answer. These may perhaps be answered by future metapsychic science, provided that it remain strictly experimental.

1. Have all persons some rudimentary cryptesthesia?

2. Why is it so developed in certain mediums? Why does hypnotism favour its appearance?

3. In spiritist seances why does the medium show from the outset an invincible tendency to assume the existence of a guide that seems to have an intelligence distinct from that of the medium?

4. Why, in the case of powerful mediums, are objective phenomena (materializations and telekinesis) nearly always associated with subjective phenomena (cryptesthesia)?

5. By what channel does cognition of things beyond sensorial perception reach the human mind? Is it the vibration of human intelligence that travels? Or do the vibrations of things present themselves to our intelligence?

6. Must we suppose that only living human minds are in play and that no others intervene — those of the dead, or of angels, demons, or gods?

In the actual state of our embryonic science these are insoluble problems. I call a halt at the facts, and decline to be led beyond them. I do not condemn the spiritist theory. It is certainly premature, and probably erroneous. But it has the immense merit of having stimulated experiment. It is one of those working hypotheses that Claude Bernard considered so fruitful. In any case, theory is by no means proved, since it is frail, inconsistent, and incoherent; we will, provisionally at least, content ourselves with saying that transcendental modes of cognition actually exist whose extent we cannot define, and therefore that all the powers that spiritualists ascribe to spirits should be attributed to that superior knowledge with which the human brain sometimes appears to be endowed.

We shall presently consider whether materializations and telekinesis may give some support to the spiritist theory; but from this time forth we can say that, taking subjective facts alone, it is not demonstrated; and the trying thing is that one does not see how it could be demonstrated — how it could be proved that human consciousness with its remembrances and its personality could survive the death of the brain.

Still, an immense step forward has been made; it has been proved that a whole world of powers, sometimes accessible, vibrates around us. We cannot even suspect the nature of those powers; we only see their effects. These effects are, however, so clear that we can assert the reality of the forces; if some mediums and some somnambulists can know things that their senses have not shown them it is that unknown forces have reached and acted upon their sensitiveness. That is all that we can say today.



XIII

Consequently the phenomena that we call subjective are only apparently so. Every phenomenon of cryptesthesia must be preceded by an exterior energy that has started it, some unknown vibration that has set in motion the latent energies of our human mind, unaware of all its powers.



XIV

There is something more than subjective metapsychics; something more than great superacuity of the senses and mysterious depths of mind: there is the action of intelligence on matter. And the appalling obscurity of the whole question, when we extend cryptesthesia without limits, becomes more appalling still.

There are the facts: they compel us to admit movements at a distance; and strange as this phenomenon may be it is not the strangest. It is even the most elementary fact in this embryonic and terrifying science.

That a mechanical energy of an unknown kind should emanate from the human body and move a table, and shake a piece of board with knocking, is not entirely incomprehensible. But that this force should produce word-making sound, lights, and living human forms — this indeed goes beyond all our concepts of the possible. A warm and living hand, a mouth that speaks, eyes that see, and thought that thrills, like the hand, the mouth, the eyes, and the thought of a human being — these are phenomena that put us to utter confusion.

We are in thick darkness. It was already impossible to understand how Banca, at the very moment that his family was about to perish a couple of thousand miles away, could speak of death lying in wait for his family; or how Figueroa could see, six months before the event, a peasant dressed in black strike a mule aside to let him pass up a spiral stair. But objective metapsychic is more puzzling still; it is an unmitigated mystery, and all attempts at explanation seem puerile.

Nevertheless no one has the right to withdraw these facts from scientific investigation.

Metapsychic science will certainly pass through many phases. It is at present in travail of greater things; but it is much that the facts have been well proved and are too plain to be denied. Unfortunately they cannot yet be built into a consistent and tenable theory; it beseems us to examine what may be inferred from all these astounding observations and amazing experiments without fear, but also without arrogance that our human limitations would render laughable.

As to materializations and telekinesis our opinion may be summed up by saying, These phenomena may be attributed to energies of human origin.



XV

Thanks to Ochorowicz, Schrenck-Notzing, Mme. Bisson, and Crawford, who carried on Crookes's work, it seems now fairly proved that materializations are ectoplasms; that is, sarcodic extensions emanating from the body of a medium, precisely as a pseudopod is projected from an amoeboid cell. All zoologists are aware that an amoeba can project a sarcode to seize upon alimentary matter and infest it. In a similar fashion fluidic filaments or extensions like clouds, veils, or stems may proceed from the body of the entranced medium, can then become organic, and take on the semblance of human limbs and occasionally of whole bodies.

In their first stage these ectoplasms are invisible, but can move objects and can give raps on a table. Later on they become visible though nebulous and sketchy. Still later they take human form, for they have the extraordinary property that they change their forms and their consistence and evolve under our eyes. In a few seconds the nebulous embryo that exudes from the body of the medium becomes an actual being; though the human ovum requires thirty years to evolve into the adult form.

Sometimes the phantom appears suddenly, without passing through the phase of luminous cloud; but this phenomenon is probably of the same order as the slower development.

This ectoplasmic formation at the expense of the physiological organism of the medium is now beyond all dispute. It is prodigiously strange, prodigiously unusual, and it would seem so unlikely as to be incredible; but we must give in to the facts. I am confident that twenty-five years hence orthodox science will admit telekinesis and ectoplasms as undisputed phenomena. The profound changes in ideas on this subject that have taken place the last twenty-five years warrant this assurance.

To state facts is not enough; we must summon up courage to outline some kind of theory, imperfect though it will necessarily be.

It has been shown that as regards subjective metapsychics the simplest and most rational explanation is to suppose the existence of a faculty of supernormal cognition that we have called cryptesthesia, setting in motion the human intelligence by certain vibrations that do not move the normal senses.

Similarly in objective metapsychics the simplest and most rational explanation is analogous — to suppose that the human organism has a faculty of external projection, of "ectoplasmisation," the emission of a material substance that can become organic.

It follows that the most reasonable hypothesis is that there are in the human body energies capable of being exteriorized.

But though this hypothesis is the most simple that can be advanced it is not really simple at all. It implies a new physiology, a new chemistry, and a new physics.

Beings with a human shape, that begin and end in white veils, that come and go like clouds, are not human beings.

Man is so close to the animal that everything proper to a human being must be allowed to animals also, in part at any rate. We have no essential function that is not possessed by any other mammal, nay even by any vertebrate or invertebrate. The generative, circulatory, nutritive, and digestive processes are practically the same in all. The difference between the animal and man is that man has a slightly more penetrating intelligence, of larger scope, and capable of remembering, analyzing, and abstracting. But this difference is not essential: man merely possesses a higher degree of intelligence. That is all; he is a highly intelligent animal, but he is an animal. Now, to transform matter, to become a living ephemeral being, and to create ephemeral living matter, is to open a new world. We are evolving in another dimension. Man is no longer man. He no longer belongs to the animal kingdom. He even transcends the mechanical world in which we move where chemistry, physics, and mathematics reign supreme.

Anything is possible. Perhaps human powers, whether moral or material, go far beyond what habitual and daily experience would lead us to think. It is demonstrated that fluidic emanations can proceed from the body and develop into human forms. It is demonstrated that this exteriorization is one of the properties of living matter.

Geley, in an able book, maintains the subconscious to be a kind of creative energy determining the histological mutations whereby the larva is transformed into a chrysalis and the chrysalis into the perfect insect. The subconscious produces stigmata and miraculous cures. It is the subconscious that directs materializations.

Certainly to connect metapsychic phenomena with the most positive data of embryology and zoology is bold and deep thinking. But this does not seem to me to bring explanation. This powerful subconscious, so omnipresent and efficient, is an undemonstrated energy, it is always the quid ignotum.

Even for Geley the subconscious is insufficient, and he is inclined to admit — without definitely affirming this — that the high and complex phenomena of mediumship seem to show external direction and intention that cannot be referred to the medium or the experimenters.

Such is Geley's opinion; it is not altogether mine. I shall say, with Lodge, that we must select the least extravagant among all the possible explanations. None of them, he says, fits all the facts. To frame theories is as premature as it would have been for Galvani to attempt to explain the nature of electricity.

In his fine work on human personality, F. Myers sketched out a theory that in some points resembles Geley's, for elementary metapsychic phenomena at any rate. According to Myers there are many personalities, subliminal centres, co-existing, working, thinking, comparing, and analyzing side by side with the principal centre (consciousness) which scarcely knows of their existence. These secondary centres are more open to influence by cryptesthetic vibrations than the central consciousness.

Certainly. But immediately afterwards, in order to explain the higher phenomena, Myers finds himself obliged formally to admit survival, and to infer that in many cases of automatic writing or speaking, these secondary centres are invaded by discarnate spirits.

The more these complex phenomena of monitions, premonitions, and collective veridical hallucinations are studied in detail, the more one is inclined to favour the hypothesis of an unknown ectoplasmic energy pertaining to human beings; and this hypothesis is so strange that all other possible hypotheses must first be exhausted.

And in the first place we can well suppose that other beings than man may move around us and influence our movements although they may not be subject to the mechanical, physical, chemical, and anatomical conditions that limit us.

Why should there not be intelligent and puissant beings distinct from those perceptible by our senses? By what right should we dare to affirm, on the basis of our limited senses, our defective intellect, and our scientific past as yet hardly three centuries old, that in the vast Cosmos man is the sole intelligent being, and that all mental reality always depends upon nerve-cells irrigated with oxygenated blood?

That there should be intellectual powers other than those of mankind and constructed on a wholly different plan is not only possible but highly probable. It might even be said to be certain. It is absurd to suppose that ours is the only mind in nature; and that inevitably every intelligent power is organized on the human or animal model with a brain as its organ.

It is obvious how deep is the mystery. For when we speak of mind, we implicitly (by our necessarily anthropomorphic way of looking at things) take it to connote memory, logic, verbal terminology, and emotion; but mind (in the human connotation) is so imperfect, so special to humanity that we cannot be fully cognizant of intelligent powers except by assimilating them more or less to mankind. This is probably a serious error, and to say "an angel is intelligent,, (in the human sense) is about as logical as if a piece of red cloth were to say, An angel is red. Our notions of spirits, whether as to their form or their thoughts, are necessarily grossly anthropomorphic.

As we are now in the realm of hypotheses, we need not fear to push our thought to its logical extreme. The basis of animal intelligence is the nerve-cell; but this by no means proves that nerve-cells, or even the chemical elements that we call "material," are necessary to all phenomena of mind. Very different beings in very different worlds are conceivable where mind would exist without nerve-cells or any material substratum. The proof that such beings exist has not been given, but their possibility is clear.

It is said: "Man only shows his mind by his brain; therefore there can be no mind without a brain." Such is the amazing logic of those who accuse us of working against science.

If it be admitted that in the universe, under conditions of space and time of which our rudimentary psychology is unaware, there are intelligent beings, interfering at certain moments in our lives, we have then a convenient hypothesis explanatory of many of the facts detailed in this book.

Mysterious beings, angels or demons, existences devoid of form, or spirits, which nozc and then seek to intervene in our lives, who can by means entirely unknown mould matter at will, who direct some of our thoughts and participate in some of our destinies, and who, to make themselves knoivn (which they could not otherwise do) assume the bodily and psychological aspect of vanished human personalities — all this is a simple manner of expressing and understanding the greater part of the metapsychic phenomena.

This is the more plausible, seeing that under a close analysis of monitions and premonitions there seem to be vague intentions beyond and outside us, which transcend human concepts, as if the intelligent forces chose to stop on the threshold of the mystery, unwilling to tell everything, speaking in symbols and enigmas, outlining misty affirmations when they might be more explicit; moving plates, tables, and wooden logs, when they might (at least according to our normal thinking) operate in a chemical or physical laboratory, or at least tell us something of the mysteries of life continued after the death of the body. But they deal in a verbose theosophy; they tell us nothing useful, and do not even indicate with any precision favourable conditions for experiment.

That such spirits should be the consciousness of defunct human beings is, strictly speaking, possible; but I venture to say, with all the caution that should guard every negation, it is not at all probable. These discarnate souls are too fundamentally different from those of living men that they should be the same; and as for the material, how should the disintegrated body after three years in a coffin be more able to find the clothes that it wore when living than to reconstitute its heart, its liver, and its eyes, which have all become formless matter?

If then (as I cannot believe) there are spirits, and they are endowed with mysterious powers (that I do not understand) and have mysterious intentions (which I understand no better), in any case they cannot be the consciousnesses of deceased persons. They belong to other worlds, different from our material world and from our moral world, and if they put on human semblances it must be to make themselves partially known to us.1 To sum up: There are three hypotheses in the field.

1. The phenomena are due to the dead, whose consciousness still persists without any material substratum. This is the spiritist theory which seems to me the least likely of any.

2. There are angels, spirits (dai}xoves) who can act on matter and on human minds, and intervene in human affairs.

3. The human intelligence (body and soul) is sufficiently powerful to produce both material manifestations (ectoplasms) and the subjective manifestations (cryptesthesia) that amaze us.

If I admit this third hypothesis as obviously superior to the others, it is not that I believe in it very strongly. Far otherwise. I am well aware how frail it is, how incredible, almost as incredible as the two former. But can anything better be put forward?

Perhaps; and I adopt without reserve a fourth proposition which has every chance of being true — we have as yet no satisfactory hypothesis to put forward.

In fine, I believe that future hypothesis that I cannot formulate because I do not know it.

Bewildering powers vibrate around us. The facts seem strangely inconsistent with ascertained truths. They are not. Since the facts are facts, the disharmony must be only seeming — the necessary consequence of our ignorance. This ignorance will

*In order to make this seemingly monstrous hypothesis in some degree acceptable, let us suppose that men do not know much more about the universe than a colony of ants knows about the earth-planet. They do not know that there are beings far superior to them in powers and intelligence; they are unaware of seas, ships, libraries, telephones, theatres, armies, courts of justice, and stars. They live as though there were nothing in the world but little bits of wood, moss, old tree-trunks, the insects that they feed upon, and the streamlets that inundate their nests. And if some ant wiser than its fellows were to tell them that there is more, in the world than this he would doubtless be thought mad, and his fellows would have no difficulty in certifying him as insane. And being myself convinced that, when all is said, we know less of the Cosmos than a nest of ants knows of this planet, I am inclined, though without tangible proof, to think that other worlds may exist besides our little physico-chemical world. The notion is surprising but not unlikely.

not last for ever: the day will come, perhaps it is not far distant, when some unexpected discovery will open a new horizon to our eyes. A man of genius, a powerful medium, a happy chance — any one of these would suffice to reveal a whole series of new truths, whence will emerge not only new solutions, but further problems of which we now have no notion.

The final outcome will be much more surprising and unexpected than our limited imagination can dream. Science, we must admit, will be transformed from top to bottom beyond our boldest anticipations.

We must advance resolutely, using exact scientific methods, being neither credulous nor timid, but trusting the marvellous power of science. Let us endeavour to recall the state of human mentality in the time of Paracelsus and Gutenberg, only four hundred years ago. Twelve generations — a very short time for the transformation of the world!

Chemistry is a marvellous science that reveals the most secret motions of the atoms, and indicates the places that these imponderable entities will take up in space by their combinations, by creating new substances. Nevertheless Chemistry began as Alchemy — own sister to Astrology.

If I had lived in the fifteenth century, I might have believed in Alchemy and Astrology; and I should have done wisely, for they have become our sciences of today. Now, I have complete confidence in metapsychics, and I do not think it will require four hundred years to grow into as exact a science as Chemistry now is.

Metapsychics has, however, to encounter a very grave difficulty special to itself that does not beset other sciences: its subject matter is not the blind forces of chemistry and physics but intelligent forces, capable of freakish, and possibly hostile, intentions. How, then, are the problems presented to be attacked? Everything seems to turn on the fall of the dice.

Fortunately it is most improbable that these intelligent forces should not be subject to definite laws, and therefore accessible to our researches.

Our aim must be to discover these laws; and who knows but that instead of being hindered by these intelligences themselves from getting to know them, as has hitherto seemed to be the case, we may not be aided by them?

However this may be, the numerous scattered facts that have now been collected show plainly that a new mentality will pervade human society as metapsychics gains influence. Not long since we were disposed to think that there could be nothing beyond the material facts verified and studied by men of science, and there was a disposition to assign limits, and not very remote limits, beyond which we held that science could not pass. More powerful microscopes and telescopes, more sensitive galvanometers and thermometers — such things bounded our limited view. Our hopes are now vastly greater; we have a glimpse of a whole unexplored world full of mysteries before which we stand as dumb and dense as a Hottentot might before Poincare's vortices, Herz's waves, Pasteur's microbes, or Einstein's relativity.

This new world is the unknown, the future, and our hope.1 As Frederic Myers and Oliver Lodge have well pointed out, perhaps a new view of human duty will emerge from these studies, which are as yet in a most elementary stage. We can scarcely foresee the subversive effects that metapsychics will have upon our ideas of the final purposes of human existence. The sciences that deal with atoms and physical forces, gravitation, heat, electricity, and chemical affinity will not be upset, for they rest on unshakable foundations. But many and great things will be added to them.

And perhaps the goal of humanity will be better understood. If we have been able to bring some of the more coherent facts of this new knowledge within the domain of positive science, that goal will be hidden in less impenetrable darkness.

At the present hour, while all is yet quite dark, our duty is plain. Let us be sober in speculation; let us study and analyze facts; let us be as bold in hypothesis as we are rigorous in experimentation.

Metapsychics will then emerge from Occultism, as Chemistry emerged from Alchemy: and none can foresee its amazing career.

But we must keep clear of illusions: the fragments of uncom-

1Pascal said as much in deeply significant words: "The secrets of Nature are hidden; although ever in action, the effects she produces are not always seen; time reveals them from age to age.... We may affirm the opposite to what the ancients have said without therefore contradicting them; and whatever authority their antiquity may have, that of truth is always greater, even when newly discovered, for truth is always more ancient than any opinion soever'' (Fragment of a Treatise on vacua, Ed. Ha vet, ii, 273).

prehended truth that the science of the occult offers to us reveal the poverty of the human understanding. The study of the heavens soon convinces an astronomer that man is an infinitesimally small object in the universe. Similarly in metapsychic science, when pale and fugitive gleams reveal intellectual worlds circling around us and in us, we feel that these worlds may perhaps ever remain as distant and incomprehensible as the far, incomprehensible stars in the depths of space.

But that is no reason for refraining from increased efforts and labour. There are great depths to be sounded. The task is so noble that, even should it fail of success, the honour of having attempted it gives fresh value to life.

