The Martian language invented by the ingenious mind of Helen Smith shows how much the subconscious is capable of. No one can suppose that the idiom is real, i.e., that the inhabitants of Mars, if they exist, speak a language queerly derived from the French. Flournoy has shown in his incomparable book the mental mechanism that goes to the creation of a new language. Helen Smith's Martian language leads us to suppose that the

xThe Mystery of Edwin Drood, 1873. (Clark Bryan, Springfield, Mass.,

U. S. A., The Spiritualist, 1873, 322.)

Sanscrit she spoke is derived from the same subconscious source.1

Nevertheless the problem presented by Helen Smith's Sanscrit is less simple than that of her Martian language, for Sanscrit is a real tongue, and moreover unusually difficult. Now Sanscrit books are not common, and Helen had none such at her disposal; she did not frequent public libraries, but what she said was Sanscrit— a rudimentary, defective, and ungrammatical Sanscrit, but still Sanscrit.2

M. de Saussure, addressing the innumerable readers to whom Sanscrit is unknown, and wishing to put them in a position to appreciate the kind of Sanscrit Helen wrote, drew out a Latin parallel as follows: Meate domina mea sorore forinda indi deo indesingodio deo primo nomine obera mina loca suave tibi offisio et ogurio et olo romano sua dinata perano die nono colo desimo ridere pevere nove.

It is barbarous and incomprehensible Latin, with here and there some single Latin words.

However, and this is very strange, there being no letter f in Sanscrit, there is none in Helen's writing. It is true that there is no u either, but ou, and Helen has written ou though she pronounced it as u.

This problem of Helen Smith's Sanscrit is a delicate one and should not be lightly treated. I am inclined to admit, not the incarnation of an Indian prince, but a certain cryptesthesia which allowed of the use of some scraps of Sanscrit. This is the mature opinion of Myers, with which I concur under reservations.

Many other books have been automatically written. But it would need a sickly and almost criminal credulity to think that Thermotis, the daughter of an Egyptian king, had dictated the work entitled Pharaon Menephtah*

Another attempt at a Martian language and a Martian novel, both very poor, was made by Mrs. Smead, studied by J. Hyslop. Not much is inferable from them. J. Hyslop, The Mediumship of Mrs. Smead, A. S. P., 1906, vi, 461-502.

2In his Nouvelles Observations (pp. 212-213) Flournoy says that the person in whose house Helen gave seances had a Sanscrit grammar in the room where the seances were given. But how could Helen have found opportunity in the course of her seance to study this grammar unknown to those present so as to acquire the elements of the language? Could she have taken this book home secretly, perhaps even unconsciously?

3Pharaon Menephtah, 2 vols., Paris, Edit. Ghio, and in the Libr. des sciences psycholog. Also Episode de la vie de Tibere, by the same author (L'abbaye des Benedictins, 2 vols.).

The spirit, "Rochester," who is supposed to have dictated, conjointly with Thermotis, these strange pages, which proceed from a mental automatism as human as it is mediocre in quality, was, it appears, once upon a time a certain Caius Lucilius. Such fantasies are not worth comment.

There is a whole literature of this kind: for instance the Letters from a Living Dead Man, by X. (London and New York, 1914). X. was an American magistrate (probably David P. Hatch of Los Angeles, California), versed in philosophy. Mr. X. also published the War Letters from a Living Dead Man (Rider, London, 1918), by the automatist Elsa Barker. These show the same vague and well-meaning idealism as most other writings of the kind. There is nothing, absolutely nothing, to show the presence of any intelligence other than that of the automatist. Quite recently a book (the second of a series), entirely automatically written has appeared in New York; but though full of high ideals, it contains no indication of anything beyond what any cultivated mind could attain without difficulty.1

The characteristics of the literature of the unconscious are distinctive enough to be recognized without difficulty. There is in the first place a marked tendency to vague and mystical phrases on the destiny of the soul and its imperishable powers. These divagations of the subconscious are always markedly religious, as if their purpose were to lay down the lines for the rites and doctrines of a new religion. They are pervaded by a love for humanity which would be touching if it were not expressed as a rhetorical and cloudy philanthropy. Automatic writings abhor precision, and shun precise indications, favouring very ordinary commonplaces. They would seem to be the work of poets ignorant of prosody, of philosophers who know no philosophy, of priests ignorant of theology; all of whom make laudable efforts to give us counsel on philosophy and precepts on religion in poetic and nebulous language.

With the rarest exceptions and despite some comical puerilities, these emanations from the subconscious are, as Myers points out, marked by undeniable morality and tend to develop all that is best in human nature.

An interesting little book on automatic writing has appeared,

1 'To a woman from Meslom," a message from Meslom in the life beyond, received automatically by Mary McEvilly (New York, Brentano, 1920). See also A Record of Psychic Experiments.

by Mrs. Hester Travers-Smith, who tells the story of her own mediumship. She worked sometimes by writing, sometimes with a planchette. She had four guides — Peter, Eyen, Astor, and Shamar. The results do not lead to any very clear inferences whether as to pragmatic cryptesthesia (psychometry) or to premonitions; but there are some useful rules on the conduct of seances for writing automatically or with the planchette.

There is automatic drawing as well as automatic writing, which sometimes gives interesting results. Helen Smith has made some curious spirit-drawings.1

She had a hallucinatory vision and reproduced it in form and colour. As she took very long to complete these drawings, sometimes only adding a few strokes of the brush in a day, their execution took more than a year. They were ultimately completed, however, and every time she was prompted to paint, the vision reappeared. Other designs have been reproduced by M. Claparede.2

Commandant Le Goarant de Tromelin has often sent me strange spiritist designs made by himself in a semi-somnambulic state. Every letter is composed of human or animal forms in juxtaposition.

A lady known to Dr. Geley has shown him sheets of automatic drawings representing abstract qualities — anger, gluttony, avarice, etc. — by clever caricatures.

I have recently seen a number of drawings by Mme. Blocus when in the mediumistic state. She is in no way a professional medium, though her mother has long been able to write automatically. Her drawings, which are sometimes very charming, are mostly ornamental designs, and are very rapidly produced.

Jules Bois has cited very many cases of mediumistic drawing; such as that by Victorien Sardou, inspired by Bernard de Palissy, entitled, 'The House of Mozart." (Sardou had written a play under that title, which had been refused.) He drew another, called, "The House of Zoroaster," in the same style. Fernand Desmoulin and Hugo d'Alesi, both talented painters in their normal state, have produced curious pictures and some remarkable designs subconsciously.

The mechanism of automatic drawing is the same as for auto-

JA. Lemaitre, Une etude psychologique sur les tableaux medianimiques de Mile. H. Smith. (Arch, de Psychologic Geneva, July, 1907.)

2Bull. de la Soc. Med. de Geneve, June 3, 1918. A. S. P., 1909, xix, 147.

matic writing. The hand draws and paints instead of writing. The impulse is irresistible, involuntary, and independent not only of the will but also of the consciousness of the medium. Outlines are drawn the meaning of which is not understood by any one, neither by the medium himself nor by other persons, but such outlines are curiously connected with others analogous to them, which, standing alone, appear devoid of significance, but taken together acquire a very definite meaning. Sometimes persons who have no artistic ability produce strange and complicated designs, which are always of a symbolic nature. Such phenomena are proper to somnambulism; it is difficult to see in them any metapsychic influence.

Spiritualist literature abounds in productions of this kind, but only credulity can see in them anything more than the lucubrations of the subconscious. Nearly all are characterized by vaguely Oriental symbolism that is sometimes not without a strange beauty.1

All these writings and paintings might have been done by human faculty. Nowhere do we find the quid divinum that would lead us to refer them to some intelligence above the ordinary human level. Therefore, as we desire to exclude from metapsychics everything of which human psychism is capable, we shall not take them into account here, but none the less they constitute an extremely curious chapter in normal psychology which should be carefully studied by psychologists.



4. Classification of the Modes of Cryptesthesia

These phenomena are so numerous, varied, and mysterious that some classification must be attempted to reduce this chaos to some sort of order.

Such groupings are necessary for study and for teaching, but there should be no illusion as to their value: they do not give any adequate interpretation of these complex phenomena. Real facts can never be classified in our arbitrary schemes with the precision we are apt to assign to them.

In the first place we shall discriminate between experimental cryptesthesia deliberately excited, and accidental cryptesthesia oc-

xSee the mediumistic designs by Machner (A. S. P., 1908, xv, 86) and by Petit Jean (A. S. P., 191 1, xxi, 360).

curring unexpectedly. This latter might be called spontaneous, but this term would not be quite accurate, for accidental cryptesthesia is induced by some exterior cause.

It is very possible that there is no essential difference between the two kinds; but the mode of studying them must be different, for they do not arise in the same way.

Experimental cryptesthesia can be more easily examined, in principle at any rate, because it is voluntarily aroused, whereas the accidental type occurs suddenly, without the intervention of an experimenter, by chance, and without intention, in normal persons either asleep, awake, or half awake, who are themselves surprised by the occurrence.

The division shows that metapsychic science is both experimental and observational. To neglect either method would be to maim the science disastrously.

Experimental cryptesthesia can be studied:

A. In normal subjects,

B. In hypnotized subjects,

C. In mediums,

D. In sensitives.

Hence come four distinct modes, even though the division between them is not very well defined: for on the one hand mediums go into trances strongly resembling the hypnotic state, and it may sometimes even be necessary to hypnotize them in order to bring out their mediumship; and on the other hand it is impossible to tell how near persons that we think normal may be to mediumship or to hypnotic states.

There is, however, this difference, that in most cases, if not in all, mediums speak, write, or move the table or the planchette as if under the influence of an extraneous personality; whereas hypnotized subjects invoke no guide. But this distinction is more apparent than real, for without doubt the past training of sensitives, mediums, and hypnotized subjects has played a preponderant part in the maintenance or the suppression of their normal personality.

Sensitives are apparently normal persons, who, without being mediums or somnambulists, seem capable of lucidity and clairvoyance under certain conditions, not accidental but experimental, such as crystal vision psychometry, etc.

Accidental cryptesthesia is that which supervenes suddenly in quite normal persons who are neither in the mediumistic nor the hypnotic state.

All accidental cryptesthesia may be called "monition."

Monitions are the revelation of some past or present event by other than the normal senses. Premonitions relate to an event in the future.

As monitions are numerous and varied, we shall distinguish between those referring to trivial events and serious ones, the latter including all monitions of death. These latter indeed represent a group of fairly homogeneous facts that it would be inconvenient to separate.

Collective monitions will be dealt with in a chapter by themselves; for they are intermediate between the subjective and the objective phenomena of metapsychics, and therefore deserve special consideration.

Finally, we must assign the phenomena of the divining-rod to cryptesthesia, and perhaps also some curious manifestations of arithmetical intelligence apparent in certain animals.1

*If it should be thought that I am too severe on theories I will answer by quoting Claude Bernard, the acknowledged master in experimental sciences:

"In science faith is an error, scepticism is a progress. All the systems... that have been created in the embryonic stages of any science are doomed to oblivion and vanish away as transitory methods, as the science takes shape. Progress, therefore, does not consist in reviving past systems, but in forgetting them and replacing them by a knowledge of the law of the phenomena" (Lessons in experimental pathology, 1872, p. 399).



Chapter III. Experimental Cryptesthesia



1. Cryptesthesia in Normal Individuals

Many experiments have been made on normal persons, though not as many as are required.

These give widely differing results according to the person under experiment. Nevertheless if lucidity exists in certain exceptional persons, as has been proved, it is probable that some traces of it will be found in others. It is highly improbable that along with those who are frequently lucid there should not be others who have some share in this faculty, however slight it may be.

It is therefore necessary to investigate whether some trace of lucidity may be discoverable in normal persons. This trace of cryptesthesia may be determined by the answer to the question, When an individual indicates at random a fact, a number, or a form whose probability is determinable, is the ratio of probability changed by the occurrence of cryptesthesia?

Long since I suggested this method of investigation, and made numerous experiments of the kind, which have been repeated and confirmed by my learned colleagues of the S. P. R.1

These experiments on insensitive or barely sensitive persons were made with playing-cards, drawings, and photographs. I have sometimes made use of the divining-rod, showing unconscious muscular movements for these experiments. In all cases the exact probability could be determined.

It was always found that the number of successes was slightly in excess of the probable number. For instance; on 2,103 guesses of playing-cards there were 552 successes as against a probable 525. But for a sound inference it is well to eliminate those that have been so many (say over 100) on any given day, as to produce fatigue and confusion. Reckoning experiments not

1C. Richet, La suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilites {Revue philosophique, 1884, xviii, 609-671); Phantasms of the Living, i, 31-70.

exceeding 100 on any day, there were 315 successes against a probable 280, the number of guesses being 1,132. This is still inconclusive.

By experiments made in England by the same method with 17,653 guesses there were 4,760 successes, exceeding the probable number by 347. This is more distinctive, but still not very convincing. It seems possible, however, to distinguish persons possessed of more or less lucidity by this means.

My friends G. F. and H. F. were certainly slightly sensitive. Working with the divining-rod when the odds were 1:8, 1:6, and 1: 48, we had the results stated below on five trials:

i: 8 i: 6 i: 48

1st trial Success. Failure. Failure.

2d trial Success. Failure. Failure.

3d trial Success. Success. Success.

4th trial Success. Failure. Failure.

5th trial Success. Success. Success.

Thus, the probability being 1 to 8, there were 5 successes on 5 trials. The probability of five consecutive successes is only 1 in 32,000. Cryptesthesia in this case is a moral certainty.

On the other hand, A. P. and myself, who neither of us have any lucidity, operating side by side with G. F. and H. F., obtained:

1. Success, failure, failure.

2. Failure, failure, failure.

3. Failure, failure, failure.

4. Failure, failure, failure.

Showing no appreciable difference between the probable number and that actually obtained, quite different from the results by G. F. and H. F.

A later series of trials made simultaneously by B., by S., and by myself with cards seen by no one, B. had 5 failures, I had 1 success, and S., who has mediumistic powers, had 2 successes. The compounded probability on two successes (each having the simple probability of 1: 52) is 1: 250.

We cannot enter into all the details given in Sir William Barrett's report (Proc. S. P. R., Experimental Telepathy, Phantasms of the Living, i, 20-29; i, 47-65); but the importance of Sir Oliver Lodge's experiment with young girls who were neither hypnotized nor mediums demands mention.1 Mr. Malcolm Guthrie made the arrangements for the experiment, which was on the reproduction of drawings. In one instance the drawing to be guessed was the Union Jack, which was reproduced without hesitation.

The conditions were perfect; and twenty years later Sir Oliver writes: "I declare positively that the experiment was entirely conclusive, and I have had no subsequent doubt of its validity.,,

218 trials were made by six persons, the probability being 1: 6. In 54 guesses Mrs. H. and Mrs. B., both of whom had some vague mediumistic power, had 22 successes, the probable number being 10 on chance alone. The four other persons in 162 trials had 45 successes against a probable 32; the ratio of the actual number to the probable one being 220 for Mrs. H. and Mrs. B., and 140 for the other four persons.

In an experiment made by Mr. Herdmann, a Cambridge professor, the results were:

Such experiments are very cogent. So likewise are those given by Ochorowicz in his excellent book on Mental Suggestion, which all should read who desire to take note of the many precautions that should be taken to eliminate causes of error.

At Brighton in 1882, with G. A. Smith as percipient, Ed. Gurney and Myers obtained very remarkable results which the strange subsequent denials of Mr. Smith do not invalidate (Proc. S. P. R., viii, 536). 2

*0. Lodge, Nature, xxx, 145, and The Survival of Man, French translation, 1912, p. 26.

2Quoted by Delanne, loc. cit., p. 268.

Actual drawing.

As guessed.

Red. Yellow. R. E.

Right-angled triangle.

Tetrahedron.

Five of clubs.

Red.

Golden color.

R.

E.

Isosceles triangle. Pyramids of Egypt. Five of spades.

Name thought of.

Barnard.

Bellairs.

Johnson.

Regent Street.

Hobhouse.

Black.

Hanter. Drack. Quechy. Wissie.

Harland.

Hamphreys.

Jobson.

Rembrandt Street.

First answer.

Second answer.

Barnard. Ben Nevis. Johnson. Regent Street. Regent Street. Blacke. Queen. Wisenaft.

Queen Anne. Wissenschaft.

More recently Sir Oliver Lodge, experimenting with the Misses de Lyro, found that they had a curious joint sensitiveness. They held each others hands. The detail is given in The Survival of Man, pp. 44-45, and strictly speaking something not quite amounting to cryptesthesia might be admitted, not fraud, but a transmission by contact, a transposition of sensibility — a phenomenon very much akin to cryptesthesia. And "the guesses changed from 'frequently correct' to 'quite wild/ directly the knuckles or finger-tips or any part of the skin of the two hands ceased to touch. It was almost like the breaking of an electric circuit"

It is to be noted that the answers were given very quickly, even for somewhat complicated figures. The number thought of, "3, 145," was given very rapidly as 3,146. The number being 715, the answer was "714; no, 715." Nevertheless, and notwithstanding the authority of Lodge, I think these very interesting experiments fundamentally different from those in which there is no contact.

In some good experiments by F. L. Usher and Burt, with themselves as percipients (they not being sensitives in the ordinary acceptation of the word), they verified that the guessing of a card was more nearly correct than chance would account for even when the operators were very far apart — London to Bristol (120 miles), and London to Prague (960 miles). On 60 trials the results were:

(p. 45).

Actual number.

Probable number.

Complete successes Value of the card., Colour of the card

4 14

28

LI 4.5

At a smaller distance, in the same room, but full precautions being taken that no indication could be given by the agent, there were, on 36 trials:

The totals are very satisfactory, for in 96 trials the number of successes was 13 against a probable number of only 2; while for the value of the card chosen the successes were 29 when chance alone would have indicated 7.1

The fact that in the case of the colour of the card the actual successes and the probable successes were both 48 shows that the experiments were very well conducted. Other experiments have been made with drawings; some of these are interesting but do not lend themselves to a calculation by probabilities. We shall return to these when speaking of clairvoyance by sensitives.

An important paper on lucidity was presented at Konigsberg in 1913 as an inaugural address by Max. Hoppe (Ueber Hellsehen, Berlin, Haussmann, 1916). His analysis of cases of lucidity as applied to guessing of cards and numbers is methodical and detailed. He establishes that even when operating with sensitive subjects, the proof is not rigorously exact, which I readily grant; but it must also be admitted that definite proof of cryptesthesia is not to be reached by this kind of experiment. Mediums and somnambulists dislike these tests which do not move their sensitive faculties like an automobile accident or a fire. Nevertheless his criticism is acute. He criticizes my own experiments on Leonie with justice; I had, however, no need to wait for this criticism to admit their very moderate value. Nor does he admit the lucidity of Mr. Reese. On this point, however, his objections seem to me valueless. He made experiments with one single person with negative results, but that proves nothing whatever. In short Mr. Hoppe confines himself to criticism (quite legitimate criticism) of my old experiments in 1884. I think he would find it difficult to maintain his position in view of my later experiments and those of the large number of men of science who have made a study of lucidity.

1Quelgues experiences de transmission dc la pcnsce a grande distance (A. S. P., 1910, xx, 14-21 and 40-54).

Actual number.

Probable number.

Complete successes Value of the card., Colour of the card.

9 15 20

0.7 2.7

Dr. Blair Thaw of New York, experimenting with Miss Thaw, has obtained very clear cases of cryptesthesia applied to colours, the telepathic mental suggestion being very evident (Hyslop, Science and a Future Life, pp. 25-30).

Colour thought of.

Light red. Green. Yellow. Light yellow. Dark red. Dark blue. Orange.

First answer.

Light red.

Green.

Blue.

Light yellow. Blue. Orange. Green.

Second answer.

Light red. Light red. Yellow. Yellow. Dark red. Dark blue. Heliotrope.

The Misses Wingfield, who certainly have remarkable mediumistic powers, made a series of 400 experiments which would be equivalent to demonstration if there be no defect in the method — a point on which I am not able to judge.

In 400 trials the probable number of successes is 4; the number obtained by thought-reading was 27. In 21 cases the digits were reversed. The odds against both results are very large, and the number of successes amounts to a moral certainty that a cause other than chance was in play (Ph. of the L., ii, 653, 669). But were the experiments unexceptionable?

Miss Lindsay and Mr. Shilton also had a number of successes far higher than the probable number (A. S. P., 1909, xix, 123).1

But however interesting the mathematical evaluation of probability in such experiments, it must always be remembered that the value to be attached to the figures depends entirely on the absence of defect in the methods pursued. Absolute experimental rigour is the essential condition.

One subject experimented on by Lombroso had his eyes and ears completely sealed and words were written behind his back

JThe bibliography is a very large one. I specially cite J. Ochorowicz, La suggestion mentale, Paris, 1884. Ch. Richet, La suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilites, Rev. Philosophique, December, 1884. Fr. Myers, On a telepathic explanation of some so-called spiritualistic phenomena (P. 5. P. R., 1883-1884, 217). Automatic writing, ibid., 1885, p. 1, May, 1887, 209; June, 1889, 222. Other curious cases are noted in the second edition of Phantasms of the Living, ii, 670-671. The experiments by the Misses Creery reported in the Phantasms of the Living, i, 25, must not be taken into account, for fraud was proved (Note relating to some of the published experiments in thought transference, P. S. P. R., 1884, 269-270).

for him to read. The first word was Margharita; he wrote Maria and then Margharita. Amore was written; he wrote Moirier, then Amore. Andrea was written; he wrote Andrea.

Dr. J. Ch. Roux, while a student, made some unexceptionable experiments with a pack of 32 cards, definitely evidential of cryptesthesia. He had 5 complete successes, the compounded probability being 1: 3000.

In another series of 81 trials he had 54 successes, as against 20 if due to chance alone. There were also 8 successes when chance would have given 1 only (A. S. P., iii, 1893, 295).

A schoolmaster whose name is not given made an experiment with a class, not with cards, but with six letters. In 7 experiments of 30 trials each with several scholars at the same time, the probable number was 5 ** ", say 990; the number of vowels indicated by the percipients was 1050, slightly, but only slightly, in excess of the chances. However, in all 7 experiments there was some excess.

Probable result. Actual result.

The probability of excess over the single probabilities being l/2, it follows that the probability that there would be an excess of y2 in 7 trials is, say 1: 128.

If instead of taking the whole of the 39 trials, we take only the first 12, the result is much higher.

Probable result. Actual result.

180 170 150 140 40 175 135

196 180 154 149 44 179 148

108 102 90 84 24 105 81

129 109 105 86 32 110 90

being 661 against a probable 594.

An experiment in telepathy with cards on a little girl of thirteen by Oliver Lodge gave some interesting results. We will quote only those in which the father of the child did not see the card (Report on a case of telepathy; /. S. P. R., May, 1913, 103).

Card drawn.

Card named.

Five of diamonds.

Five of clubs.

Four of hearts.

Two of hearts.

Four of hearts.

Three of hearts.

Four of hearts.

Four of hearts.

Ace of hearts.

Ace of hearts.

King of diamonds.

An eight.

King of diamonds.

A king.

King of diamonds.

King of clubs.

King of diamonds.

King of hearts.

Ten of diamonds.

Ten of diamonds.

Ace of diamonds.

Two of clubs.

Three of diamonds.

Four of spades.

Three of spades.

Two of hearts.

Three of spades.

Four of spades.

Three of spades.

Two of spades.

Three of spades.

Two of hearts.

Knave of clubs.

Picture card.

Knave of clubs.

Knave of clubs.

Ten of clubs.

Picture card.

Ten of clubs.

A six.

Ten of clubs.

Nine of clubs.

Ten of hearts.

An eight.

Ten of hearts.

Picture card.

Ten of hearts.

A seven.

Ten of hearts.

Heart.

Ten of hearts.

Ten of hearts.

It is very instructive that the child succeeded well when the card had been seen by Lodge, and failed when he had not seen it; so that Lodge is inclined to think (without expressly saying so), that the case was one of telepathy and not of lucidity, in other words, that the cryptesthesia was the result of mental transmission.

The experiments of Mr. Henry Rawson with drawings are quite conclusive and would involve absolute certainty of telepathic cryptesthesia if there were no defect in the experiment, as to which I am unable to express an opinion, as in the case of Miss Wingfield. In the first experiments Mr. Rawson only was in the room with the percipient, Mrs. L. and the agent, Mrs. B. Mrs. L. and Mrs. B. are sisters. Their backs were turned to one another and it was absolutely impossible for Mrs. B. to see the drawing made by Mrs. L. (Myers, Human Personality, i, 614).

Analogous facts were observed by Mr. Kirk. He had remarkable success, though the percipient was very far distant, as much as 360 miles (Myers, ibid., p. 620). There were some very striking successes under these conditions; especially in one case a hand drawn by Mr. Kirk was reproduced by Miss G. (p. 621); in another a little dog. Later on Mr. Kirk, having tried to magnetize Miss G., unknown to her, and at a distance, seems to have failed.

Myers quotes from Mr. A. Glardon experiments in thoughttransmission at great distances, from Tour de Peilz in Switzerland to Ajaccio in Corsica, or Florence, between Mr. Glardon and a friend of his, Mrs. M. The results were sometimes very good; there were failures, but the successes were such as to carry conviction of real cryptesthesia.

We shall see in the sequel that cross-correspondences, analogous to these experiments, have also given good, though perhaps less decisive, results.

M. Max Dessoir, who is profoundly experienced in hypnotic phenomena, endeavoured to ascertain what guessing at drawings would do in his own case. The results were barely greater than would be due to chance (Phantasms of the Living, ii, 642).

Similar experiments, mentioned above, had been previously made by Mr. Guthrie of Liverpool, with Miss Relph and Miss Edwards, in October, 1883 (Phantasms of the Living, i, 38). About 150 trials were made, the successes being sometimes very complete; three of these are given in the figure to enable the reader to judge. The percipient had her eyes bandaged, and the drawing, instead of being placed in an opaque envelope, was steadfastly gazed at by the agent.

Mr. J. Edgar Coover has written a voluminous account of the results of many experiments made by him with playing-cards, which are not entirely negative whatever he may say; they seem to indicate that average persons have some degree of cryptesthesia (lucidity) though extremely slight. In 5,135 experiments in telepathy the numbers indicated by probability were 513 and 128 (complete success); the actual numbers obtained being 538 and 153 (complete success). This is painfully small but it is something.

In 4,865 experiments on lucidity the probable numbers were 486 and 122 (complete success), the actual numbers obtained being 488 and 141; which again is a very slight excess on the probability.

It is as well to note that some persons are better endowed with the faculty than others. Choosing fourteen persons who seem to have some degree of lucidity their results were 119 and 54 on 711 experiments, the probable numbers being 71 and 18.

The excess over probability is considerable, but some reserves must be made in regard to this plan of choosing only the best of the experiments.1

We cannot follow out the very lengthy details given by Mr. Coover. In spite of all his efforts his own results actually prove a slight, though very slight, degree of something more than chance in guesses at a card drawn, whether it be due to telepathy or to lucidity.

Pickmann, who gave public seances in thought-reading, probably by muscular indications from the person whose hand he held, possibly had some degree of cryptesthesia. He seems to have given a very successful exhibition of mental suggestion to

Lombroso.2

He came to visit me one day, and I tried an experiment that seems unexceptionable. While Pickmann was in another room I spread an entire pack of 52 cards on the table. I chose one of these cards at random, looking at it closely but without touching it, and endeavouring to visualize it. I then fetched Pickmann from the next room, and placing him with his back to the cards asked him to name the card I had thought of. He succeeded at the first trial, 1: 52, which pleased us both. But three further trials failed.

I will also mention, passim, another experiment, though it stands alone and chance may have had something to do with it.

Experiments in Psychical Research, Stanford University (Calif). Analyse in P. S. P. R. par F. G. S. Schiller; November, 1916, xxx, 261-273.

2Cited by Delanne (Gac. lift., Turin, 1892), but being unable to refer to the original, I cannot say exactly under what conditions the experiment may have been made.

Fig. i. — Three experiments by Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. The drawings on the right are the reproductions of Mr. Guthrie's original designs on the left. Miss Edwards's eyes were bandaged, but she was too far away to see anything even had this not been done.

That morning I had bought a pack of tarot cards in order to use them in card-guessing experiments. During the day Henry Ferrari came to see me. I said, "Let us try an experiment. Look carefully at one of these tarots; I will try to divine which you have looked at." After a few moments, I said, without knowing why, "It is of peasants reaping or harvesting." The card represented a skeleton holding a scythe. There was only one card with a scythe in the pack, and I had not looked through the pack.

It is to be regretted that studies of cryptesthesia in normal persons are so seldom made, both because the calculation of probabilities is very easy, and because it leads to the discovery of those who possess some degree of lucidity. But it must not be supposed that it is very easy to make unexceptionable experiments. On the contrary, the experiments are exceedingly delicate and certain rules must be observed:

1. The agent must be absolutely motionless, be silent, and have his back turned to the percipient. This is fundamental.

2. The choice of the number, the card, or the drawing must be made by pure chance.

3. No result, whether success or failure, should be told to the percipient before the end of the sitting.

4. Not more than twenty trials should be made on any one day.

5. All results, whatever they may be, should be stated in full.

6. The percipient must be unable to see anything, directly or indirectly; it is best that his eyes should be bandaged and his back turned.

An important question then arises, which we shall deal with later: Is the lucidity telephathic or non-telepathic? Telepathic lucidity certainly exists; it has been proved by numerous experiments. Non-telepathic lucidity is also proven, but fresh experiments are required.1

These methods are not emotional or dramatic like experiments made with powerful mediums, or records of monitions of death, but they are precise, and, when the experiment is well designed,

xThe difficult but essential experimentation to clear up this arduous problem might be attempted as follows: It might not be difficult to find some intelligent and trustworthy teacher in a primary school who would undertake it.

To a class of 30 the teacher would show 36 pictures in six groups, each group being composed of six different subjects of the same type such as the following, which I suggest as suitable:

Vegetable kingdom. Oak, Rose,

Mushroom,

Potatoes,

Field of wheat,

Palm-tree.

2. Animal kingdom. Fish, Spider, Horse, Elephant, Pigeon,

Flock of sheep.

3. Celebrated men. jEsop, Caesar,

Christopher Columbus, Napoleon, Charlemagne, President Carnot.

4. Manufactured objects.

Key, Book, Lamp,

Ship, Gun.

Carriage,

5. Anatomical. Ear, Eye,

Skeleton,

Hand,

Heart,

Mouth and lips.

6. Historical pictures.

Millet's "Angelus,". The Marriage at Cana.

The Crucifixion, Battle of Eylau, Death of Caesar, The Pyramids,

The designs should be numbered from i to 36, and would be printed on 36 cards. The subjects chosen are such that no confusion is possible. In each group there would be two in blue, two in red, and two in yellow. Probability in choice would then be 1: 6 for the group, 1: 3 for the colour, and 1: 36 for the subject, and 1: 18 for group and colour combined.

Experiment would be made in the following manner:

t. For telepathic lucidity. The teacher would draw one of the 36 cards, look at it attentively, mentally pronouncing the name. He would then ask every pupil to write down his guess at the card without any communication with those next him. This would be the first answer.

2. For non-telepathic lucidity. One or two minutes after the first experiment, the teacher would draw one of the 36 cards, but would not look at it, so that no one would know what card had been drawn. The children would then write a second answer.

By repeating this experiment with 30 pupils for ten days, we should have 600 replies, which would be enough for some inference.

We hold such packs of cards at the Metapsychic Institute, Paris, at the disposal of any one who would consent to undertake this experiment.

Of course every answer must be included without any exception, and no opportunity must be given to the pupils to see the face of the teacher during the experiment for telepathic lucidity. The names of the children should be attached to their answers to ascertain those who may have exceptional powers.

M. Carre, a teacher at Oissery, was obliging enough to make this experiment. With telepathy, i.e., when he knew the card chosen (probability 1: 36), he obtained with 27 pupils, giving 1,215 answers, 31 successes, the probable number being 33. This result is entirely due to chance.

When the teacher did not know the card, the number of answers was 1,125, with 25 pupils, and there were 48 successes, the probable number being only 31. There were considerable differences between different pupils. The probable number on 90 answers for each pupil being 2, there was one undeniable. The results are clear. Chance is not a factor in physical and chemical experiments; why should it be in metapsychic science? If an event takes place against odds of 1: 100,000 I shall not decide that it has come about by chance, and two or three equally unlikely events occurring give a certainty that there is some cause in action. The whole crux is that the experimental method should have been perfect. All our efforts should be concentrated on this.

We conclude, therefore, from these experiments to which the calculus of probabilities can be applied, that lucidity or transmission of thought is a reality even «among normal persons, without calling in hypnotism or spiritualism. In other words, there is a faculty of cognition other than the usual faculties; it exists in nearly all human beings, even those that seem least sensitive, but in these latter it is so slight as to be almost negligible.

This faculty is more readily called into play by keen emotion or by some violent event than for the cognition of a number or a card, though by these means it may be made apparent to some small extent. In most non-sensitives it is so vague and so indistinct that it is difficult to verify, but by making a large number of experiments a trace of its existence can be found.

It is probable that this cryptesthesia is often telepathic, but the telepathy is but one of its forms, perhaps the commonest. Experiments on normal persons indicate both telepathy and lucidity, and both are probable, however feeble and imperfect they may be. It follows that the thought of one man is mysteriously linked to that of others. We are not isolated, but are in some obscure connection with our fellows; there is some truth in the idea of what has been called the soul of the crowd. A current of sympathy or anger, of indignation or enthusiasm, powerful though undefinable, may lead to well-nigh unanimous

who was right 7 times and two who were right 6 times. This would appear to provide material for interesting research.

M. Warcollier has suggested an ingenious proceeding — to utilize the old game of "meeting": taking the 13 diamonds from the pack, lay them down back upwards without the face having been seen. The player who has not seen the diamonds takes 13 clubs in his hand and places one on each diamond. The probability of success, i.e., that both cards will be of the same value, is 1: 13. Interest may be given if the banker pays 13 pence at each success and receives a penny for each non-success. The play is fair and amusing. Would the problem be different according as the banker knows the diamond (telepathy), or does not know it (lucidity)? The club cards are seen by the player, the diamonds are not.

teeling in a theatre, in a court, or a Parliament, sweeping away all barriers in its course. Is it permissible to compare this collective emotion to the mental transmission observable in the experiments detailed above?

Unfortunately mathematical reasoning does not carry much conviction. "Chance" is constantly put forward, and possibly with reason, for the divergence between the probable number of successes and those due to cryptesthesia is insufficient to convince. But we shall see in subsequent chapters that this strange faculty is very greatly developed by hypnotism and mediumship, and this will bring complete conviction of its existence.



2. Cryptesthesia Under Hypnotism and Magnetic Treatment

The history of hypnotism is curious and a striking instance of a quite revolutionary change in ideas; for from 1790 to 1875, somnambulism and animal magnetism were held to be occult sciences unworthy of the attention of scientific men. It was ill-omened and forbidden ground.

Mesmer, and after him Puysegur, Deleuze, Husson, Braid, and Liebeault, had, no doubt, made some remarkable experiments, but these were not sufficiently exact to win official recognition which is always slow and tardy; they were not such as to detach the physiology of hypnotism from its mystical associations.

In 1875, while still a student, I was able to show that hypnotism is not an illusion due to skilful or gross fraud, but a physiological and psychological fact, as natural and experimentally demonstrable as the tetanus produced by strychnine or sleep induced by opium.

To show the general state of mind in 1875 when, two years before Charcot and Heidenhain, I published my researches, it will suffice to quote the opening words: "It needs some courage to use the word 'somnambulism/ Perhaps today less courage is needed to speak of materializations."

Somnambulism is now a recognized and unquestioned fact that no longer pertains to metapsychics.

There are, however, some episodes in its history that have to do with cryptesthesia. It may well be asked: (1) Whether the so-called magnetic action of the magnetizer is in any way specific; in other words, whether there are magnetic emanations perceptible only by sensitives; (2) whether the hypnotic state generates cryptesthesia.



(a) Magnetic Emanations

The point to be determined is whether, when the old method of passes, used by Du Potet, Deleuze, and Lafontaine (which I have often practised and which is still frequently used), disengages some special human power — a "magnetic fluid" — which acts on human beings. To this important question no satisfactory answer can yet be given.

The simplest hypothesis, and the one that is current today, is that when a subject goes to sleep, this takes place by suggestion, verbal or otherwise, and consequently that the so-called magnetic passes are merely accessory or useless, unless as reinforcing suggestion. It is said that silence, dim light, a certain tension of mind caused by these preparations, and a series of tacit or spoken suggestions all contribute to bring about the hypnotic state without calling in any "magnetic fluid." The somewhat dramatic emotion caused by the passes contributes to the effect. Later on, when semi-unconsciousness has been obtained, custom and habit play a preponderant part in later sleeps. Passes are always symbolical; if a person has once been put to sleep he will always be more easily put to sleep, whether by the same magnetizer or by another. There is no need to invoke a magnetic fluid or a new form of energy. Such is the opinion current among medical men (Babinski).

They state further that imitative suggestion is often enough to explain hypnotic phenomena. If in a hospital ward, a barracks, a school, or a cloister, one sick person, soldier, child, or nun has been put to sleep it is easy to do the like with most of the others. There is a real nervous contagion, as may be seen in the demoniacal epidemics of the Middle Ages, or the convulsionists and hysterics of more recent times.

A kind of hypnotic sleep may be produced in animals by a stationary and brilliant object. Fr. Kircher showed in the seventeenth century that a hen could be paralyzed by putting the fowl on its back and drawing a chalk line on the ground from its beak. In the same way it is said the hypnotic state can be induced in certain persons by fixed gaze at a crystal ball or some bright object.

I have never been able to verify anything of the kind. Magnetic sleep can certainly be induced in those used to it by a bright object; but with such persons anything will suffice. The eyes soon close and loss of sensation supervenes, at first slight, but increasing as consciousness disappears.

Hypnotism by fascination must be akin to that produced by a bright object. A certain Donato had remarkable powers (or skill) of this kind. He would choose from a large audience five, six, twelve, or even twenty persons, who were certainly neither confederates nor accomplices, would take them on the stage, look fixedly into their eyes, and after half a minute or less would turn them into automata having no will of their own. If after half a minute he did not succeed (which happened often enough) he left the refractory subject and went to another. In a few minutes he thus collected some fifteen persons, often quite young people, who obeyed the most absurd verbal suggestions.

These cases have been compared to the fascination exerted by some animals — a snake, or a pointer dog — but such analogies are very vague.

However, hypnotic sleep can be induced in many persons, though not in all, by some means or other — by passes, by a bright object, by a fixed gaze, or by verbal suggestion. Imitation and repetition greatly favour success.

But is this the whole story? Is there any positive proof that any so-called magnetic vibration proceeds from the magnetizer to the hypnotized person? If one were as little exacting and as little precise as the magnetizers of 1840, some reasons might be alleged in favour of the hypothesis of a human magnetic "fluid"; but nowadays we are less credulous.

I shall therefore set aside the notions of Reichenbach on odic force, of Baraduc on "effluvia," of Charazain on human polarity, for these allegations, mystical rather than scientific, are founded on imperfect data. Nevertheless, it would be somewhat rash to reject off-hand the hypothesis of a magnetic fluid; and we shall make a brief study of it.1

In the first place, it certainly appears that some magnetizers have more power than others. This is unquestionable, however little observers may have known how to study it.

If I may be permitted to quote my own experience, I may say

xBar£ty, Le magnitisme animal ktudie sous le nom de force neurique rayonnante et circulante dans ses propridtes physiques, physiologiques et thirapeutiques, Paris, Doin, 1887. H. Baraduc, Les vibrations de la vitaliti humaine, Paris, J. B. Bailliere, 1904. La force vitale, notre corps vital, fiuidique, une formule barometrique, 1905. M. Benedikt, Die latenten Emanationen der Chemikalien (C. Konegen, Wien, 19 1 5).

that formerly, when I certainly operated less skilfully than I do now, I could induce the sleep quite easily even in insensitive subjects, whereas at the present time I can scarcely ever produce the least hypnosis in any person. Dr. Maingot and Dr. Emile Magnan, who were once very powerful magnetizers, have observed the same thing. Formerly "they could do what they pleased," they told me; but now, though not old men, they were surprised at their inability to induce deep hypnosis.

Under different circumstances when an attempt was made to hypnotize me, I seemed to perceive that some persons, such as J. Ochorowicz, the magnetizer Cannelle, and Dr. Faivre, acted on me fairly speedily and produced a somnolent state, whereas the efforts of others were fruitless.

Mr. Sydney Alrutz,1 a professor in Upsala University, is inclined to think (and the opinion is shared by Sir William Barrett) that a certain fluid is emitted by the human body which acts directly on the sensitive. Magnetizing a finger of the subject through thick glass, the eyes of the subject being bandaged, the finger becomes absolutely insensitive. But it is nearly impossible to avoid all suggestion and it is one of the most difficult experiments to conduct satisfactorily.

The question must therefore be considered still open. It would be interesting to study it exhaustively. Are the phenomena produced by a magnetic fluid, by verbal suggestion, by hypersensibility of the normal senses, or by telepathy? All these hypotheses are admissible, and in despite of many investigations it is impossible to say. Myers says, "It is probable that magnetic passes have per se a certain specific power." 2

I go a little further in doubting, and say — it is almost probable.

No great confidence can be placed in the statements of magnetized persons when they say they see effluvia. "Most somnambules,,, said Deleuze in 1813, "see a bright and shining light round their magnetizer emitted strongly from his head and his hands." But this has not been repeated and is certainly a case of suggestion. A. de Rochas, despite his undoubted talents and persevering efforts, has been unable to demonstrate the externalization of sensibility in any rigorously scientific manner. I

Sydney Alrutz, Erscheinungen in der Hypnose (Zeitsch. fur Psychologie, 1909). W. F. Barrett, Some recent hypnotic experiments (/. 5. P. R., January, 1912, 179-186).

2Human Personality, i, 404. See also Mrs. Sidgwick and A. Johnson, S. P. R., January, 19 12, 184.

put aside the perception of effluvia from a steel magnet, for this radiation is not within the province of metapsychics.

I cannot accept the ideas of A. de Rochas on exteriorization of sensibility because I think he has not been sufficiently on his guard against suggestion. Excepting the instance in which he worked on sick people in the hospital at Luys, some of whom certainly were fraudulent, his subjects were honest, but the successes he obtained seem due to suggestion; few have obtained them after him.

According to J. Maxwell, it is possible, after sitting for a considerable time in complete darkness, to see luminous radiations from the fingers. This question has been exhaustively treated by De Rochas.1 He refers also to observations by Dr. Walter Kilner of St. Thomas's Hospital, London, and to others by Dr. O'Donnell of the Mercy Hospital, Chicago. It would seem that by looking at the nude body of a human being through certain screens in a darkened room luminous effluvia can be seen that follow the outline of the body; but as these two doctors do not state the exact nature of these screens, they do not really tell us anything.2

On this subject A. de Rochas very aptly quotes Reichenbach's careful experiments. These are disputable, but ought to be resumed and reconsidered.

As for the aureoles of saints and luminous hands, these cannot be allowed any scientific value.

In fine, the whole of this question needs to be reopened ab ovo with the rigorous methods of investigation that we have at our disposal today.

This is not to allege that the problem is easy to solve. The curious history of Blondlot's N-rays shows how difficult it is to avoid illusion and hypothesis.

The aura, the astral body, the perisprit, the odic effluvia are all names for the same thing — a human or animal radiation. It may be that this radiation is a fact, anything is possible, but up to the present no one has been able to prove it. If, or when, it should at last be verified, all that Reichenbach, De Rochas, and the old magnetizers have said would be linked up with it; and

xLes radiations lumineuses du corps humanin. (A. S. P., September, 191 1, xxi, 264.)

2Is it dicyanin? See G. de Fontenay, L'aura humaine et les Scrans du Dr. Walter Kilner (A. S. P., March, 191 2, 74)-

I should not be very greatly surprised if this discovery were made; but this is not the case as yet; there is not even the beginning of a sound proof.

Dr. Joire has made some experiments of exteriorization of sensibility which would seem to support the idea; but there are no grounds for supposing that this sensitiveness is apparent at one, two, or ten centimeters, distance from the surface of the skin. Probably it is but a special variety of lucidity or cryptesthesia. Its mechanism is certainly less simple than De Rochas indicates in the schematic diagram he gives (Fig. A, p. 57, of his book) showing a series of sensitive layers forming an imaginary envelope to the cutaneous surface.1

The magnetizers gave the name "rapport" to the relation that they supposed to exist between the magnetizer and his patient; this relation being such that the sensations of the former were perceived by the latter, who could also divine the thought of the magnetizer without the utterance of any word. P. Janet, a careful and sceptical observer, has verified that Leonie B., being put to sleep by himself or his brother (from whom Leonie in her sleep was unable to distinguish him) could recognize exactly the substance that he placed in his mouth — sugar, salt, or pepper. One day his brother, J. Janet, in an adjoining room, scorched his right arm above the wrist. Leonie, who could have known nothing about it normally, gave signs of real pain, and showed to P. Janet (who knew nothing of the occurrence) the exact place of the burn. Evidently this was not due to chance, but rather than admit a transfer of sensation I should call it a fact of cryptesthesia, which involves no hypothesis.

G. Delanne quotes various instances in which sleep has been induced from a distance without any possible knowledge by the subject of the attempt of the magnetizer to put him to sleep.2 But the perspicacity of these subjects, both conscious and subconscious, is so acute that no certain conclusion can be deduced. In the celebrated experiments by Dr. Husson with Mme. Sanson, all necessary precautions do not seem to have been taken.3

XA. S. P., 1897, see the discussion raised /. 5\ P. R., December, 1906, p. 535. See also: Reichenbach, Le fluide des magnetiseurs, precis d' experiences sur ses proprietes physiques et physiologiques, classees et anno tees, by A. de Rochas, d'Aiglun, 8vo, Paris, Carre, 1891.

2F. Delanne, Recherches sur la mediumnite, 1902, 259-280.

8On this obscure subject see F. Myers, Human Personality, i, 524-533. There are also some observations by J. Hericourt, De Dufay, De Wetterstrand, and De Man. de Tolosa-Latour; but I repeat I am unable to come to a conclusion.

The existence, then, of a vital fluid or magnetic effluvium is not demonstrated. Nevertheless, I should incline to the opinion that if hypnotizable subjects who had not yet undergone the experience were magnetized successively by two persons, A. and B., the former known to have strong magnetic power, and the latter devoid of it, but proceeding apparently in precisely the same fashion, nearly all the sensitives would be put into the sleep by A. and scarcely any by B. This is only a guess; I mention it as it would seem to suggest an experiment that might give a clear result, if correctly performed.

If Donato and some others brought about this quick and crude fascination, how much is due to the skill acquired by long experience, and how much to personal influence? I could not say; but I imagine that to speak of Donato's skill scarcely covers the facts and that some special physiological influence emanating from him is not improbable. But all this is very vague.

Have magnetic passes any effect upon animals? Rabbits and frogs can be hypnotized, or reduced to a state of torpor and passiveness that somewhat resembles the hypnotic state in human subjects. But even if the hypnosis of animals (the cataplexy of Preyer) be absolutely true and easy to verify, that proves nothing as to the alleged human effluvia. If, as I have several times observed, a frog after having been gently massaged for a few minutes stands quite still and seems paralyzed, may not this be the effect of slight cutaneous excitement exhausting its nervous centres? Is fear a possible cause? Certain animals, insects especially, feign death as a means of protection.

As to this physiological influence of magnetic effluvia we are wandering in absolutely unexplored regions. I do not even see how good experiments could be made to establish the reality of such emanations.

The magnetizer Lafontaine declares that he magnetized a lion. The story is amusing, but certainly not proof against criticism.

Has human magnetism a healing power on the sick? Certainly it often has; if the magnetizer places his hand on a painful spot the pain is relieved. But what is the part played by suggestion, since we know from Bernheim and other physicians that certain neuralgic aflfections, headaches, and rheumatic pains can be greatly relieved by suggestion alone?

Liebeault was able to produce healing effects on children under three years old; he quotes forty-six cases of treatment of children under four; which excludes suggestion. Ochorowicz has told me definitely that he has been able to relieve pain and reduce morbid action by imposition of hands on children under two years old. Healers proceed in this manner and perhaps the curative action is not imaginary.1

All this adds up to very little, strictly speaking to nothing. There is as yet nothing that clearly shows that a special fluid is released by an act of will.2

The only demonstration that would tend to prove magnetic action would be to prove that a magnetizer can put a subject to sleep from a distance.

Unfortunately, the experiment is not at all easy to carry out, for we must take account of the extraordinary vigilance displayed by the subjects who, consciously or unconsciously, gather the faintest indications and seek with quite disconcerting acuteness (which is in no way metapsychic) to guess the intentions of the magnetizer. The slightest noise, the least glance by persons round them, suffices for them to guess the presence of the magnetizer or his desires, to which they eagerly conform. In a celebrated experiment, Du Potet in 1827 succeeded in putting Mme. Sanson to sleep without her being aware of his presence, as he states. But is that quite certain? Husson and Recamier were there; may not their presence have been an indication to Mme. Sanson?

Many experiments have been made to verify this fluidic action at a distance. I quote among the latest those by Pierre Janet, Boirac, J. Ochorowicz, J. Hericourt, Dr. Dusart, and my own, and I must say none carry conviction.3

*I cannot here touch upon the history of curative magnetism which begins with Paracelsus and Goclenius, De magnetica vulneris curatione extra ullam et super slitionem et dolorem et remedii applicationem, Marburg, 1610. Faithhealing, the miracles at Lourdes, stigmata might here be examined; but the psychic action of the central nervous system is not within the domain of metapsychics. It is likely that healing magnetism is not wholly suggestion, but the part played by suggestion is not yet determined.

*U exteriorisation de la sensibility. Etude experimental el historique, by A. de Rochas, 1 vol., 8vo, Paris, Chacornac, sixth edition, 1909.

8P. Janet et Gilbert, Sur quelques phenomenes de somnambulisme, Bull, de la Soc. de psychologie de Paris. Revue philosophique, 1886 (1), xxi, 190-198. Ch. Richet, Un fait de somnambulisme a distance, ibid., 199-200. J. Hericourt, Un cas de somnambulisme a distance, ibid., 200-204. A. Ruault, Le mecanisme de la suggestion mentale hypnotique. Revue philosophique, 1886, (2), 691. Boirac (cite par Flammarion), L'inconnu et les problemes psychiques, 310. Dusart (cite par Flammarion), ibid., 308.

And yet if, as will be abundantly demonstrated in the sequel, there really is a special crypthesthetic faculty which reveals facts that our normal senses cannot supply, it is easy to conceive that the influence of the magnetizer may be more or less clearly perceived by a sensitive subject; so that magnetization from a distance becomes but a mode of cryptesthesia.

Even admitting human effluvia, the emission of a special fluid, or specific vibrations, there is nothing to show that this is comparable to a rhabdic force — that which turns the divining-rod, a power emanating from things awaking cryptesthesia. The emanations from things are probably not identical with those from magnetizers. Will has nothing to say to them since they proceed from inanimate objects.

Distance also counts for nothing. There have been cases of lucidity at a distance of more than six hundred miles between agent and percipient, so that exteriorization of sensibility by spheres surrounding our cutaneous integument to a distance not exceeding a few yards, is not even a plausible explanation.

Indeed the impression of a form, a name, or an image is sometimes so precise that it is not sufficient to speak of an "effluvium that causes sleep." The cryptesthetic cognitions are detailed, minute, and complete. In other words, it is proved that certain individuals acquire by cryptesthesia knowledge that their ordinary senses do not give them; but that is all that is really demonstrated. No one has yet proved that there are human effluvia liberated by the will of the magnetizer, which have the power to induce sleep.

As for the influence of one human thought on another, thoughttransference, mental suggestion, and telepathy do not belong to hypnotism; they are the fundamental phenomena of subjective metapsychics, and will be studied in full detail later on. From this point of view somnambulic sleep at a distance and the action of magnetic emanations pertain to cryptesthesia. But this latter is proved whilst the former are not.



(b) The Development of Cryptesthesia by Hypnotism

In certain cases lucidity can be verified quite apart from any hypnosis or any kind of sleep; and most of the monitions we shall presently speak of refer to normal individuals. Similarly certain very remarkable facts of experimental lucidity observed in spiritist seances have been manifested by mediums that no one had hypnotized, who were apparently (perhaps only apparently) in a quite normal state.

It is therefore evident that cryptesthesia can exist apart from the hypnotic state; but it is not less well established that hypnosis increases cryptesthesia. Various persons quite incapable of any transcendental manifestations when their senses are awake, become lucid when hypnotized. Instead of supposing the (very doubtful) existence of an unknown magnetic fluid arousing cryptesthesia it is better to admit that the hypnotic state facilitates cryptesthesia because it suppresses or reduces normal perceptions. This is a hypothesis, but a likely one.

In the normal state we are conscious of our existence, and of many sensations that our senses bring to us. The sensations of sight and hearing continuously reach our consciousness and keep it aroused. These sensations are so numerous and so strong that other vague and confused ideas that another mysterious sense might give us find no place. We are like a person walking in the sunlight who is unable to see the dim light of the glow-worm in the hedge that becomes easily visible at night. This is but an analogy, but one that explains why both hypnosis and normal sleep, suppressing or reducing normal sensibility, should favour lucidity.

Under profound hypnosis the subjects are insensitive, and surgical operations can be performed on them without their feeling pain. I have often seen a young woman, in deep hypnotic sleep, making neither movement nor gesture when flies were walking on her lips and nostrils. Sometimes the loudest noises are unheard and do not awaken the person. Good subjects when hypnotized are insensible to ordinary stimulation, and this may render them more sensitive to the stimulations of an unknown kind that awaken cryptesthesia.

Similarly many monitions have been recorded, taking place in normal sleep. M. Warcollier has drawn up statistics on the frequency of monitions in sleep or when half awake. The senses are then benumbed as in hypnotic sleep; and the unknown vibrations, doubtless very feeble, that arouse cryptesthesia can be more readily perceived. To hear a slight sound, other noises that mask it must be absent. Hypnosis and sleep bring to consciousness the darkness and the silence necessary to the perception of minute forces.

The so-called divinations by which somnambules diagnose disease and its treatment find their place in a study of cryptesthesia. I shall not insist on the therapeutic side; an exact estimate of its efficacy, even in normal medicine, is such a delicate matter that it is impossible to say what may be valid in the treatment advised by somnambules. Moreover, it has been abundantly proved that suggestion acts with great power on the sick. Everyone knows the stories of miraculous cures at Lourdes, resembling those that were seen two centuries since at the tomb of Deacon Paris. Perhaps it would be well to bring some of these authenticated cures into the domain of metapsychic science. Without drawing any conclusions, I will mention three which by the complexity of their phenomena touch metapsychics in some measure.

The first case is one very carefully observed by M. Mangin.1 It was a case of paraplegia in Mile. B., aged twenty-eight; duration of the disease, twenty-five months; her arms only were capable of some movement, she could barely turn her head; there was double curvature of the spine, wheeze and dull spots on the lungs. Temperature 102.2 in the evening. Three doctors in succession gave the diagnosis following:

1. Paraplegia; prognosis serious.

2. Potts's disease; compression of spinal column and paraplegia.

3. Paraplegia, medullary lesion; prognosis very serious.

When M. Mangin saw her on the 26th of February, Mile. B. saw at his side the form of a beautiful woman who told Mile. B. that she would get well and that on the 8th of May she would be able to get up. From the 26th of February to May 8th M. Mangin magnetized her, and during her magnetic sleep she always saw the beautiful woman. On the 8th of May she was completely cured. She got up, put her feet to the ground, and kissed the face of her imaginary friend, and by the 15th of May seemed to be completely cured; the thoracic trouble and the curvatures had disappeared. The cure was maintained; she married and has had two children.2

This case is most remarkable; it is incredible that there should have been three gross mistakes in the diagnosis and that the case should have been one of hysteria.

xDevant le mystbre de la nevrose. De la gutrxson de cas riputds incurables, umo, Paris, Vuibert, 1920.

aM. Mangin reports a curious instance of premonition made by Mile. B.

In the two following cases also hysteria is equally insufficient to account for the facts.

A workman named Derudder had both bones of his leg broken in February, 1867. He became worse; there was much suppuration, and no disposition of the bones to unite; the lower part of the leg could be moved in all directions. Eight years later, during a visit for prayer at the sacred grotto of Oostaker near Ghent where there is a grotto similar to that at Lourdes, Derudder felt himself cured, held himself upright, put his feet to the ground and could walk, having been on crutches for eight years.

The case is reported by two doctors and depends on the exactitude of their observations.

The second case is equally strange. In 1897 Gargam was seriously injured in a railway accident; paraplegia supervened with muscular atrophy and the beginnings of gangrene. Two medical certificates put in for the action against the railway company (Paris-Orleans) stated the case as incurable and likely to become worse. At Lourdes Gargam was cured almost immediately when he entered the grotto; he was able to make some tottering steps. The next day the suppurating wounds in the feet seemed cured; he was able to walk without help, in spite of the withered muscles. Three weeks later his weight had increased by twenty pounds, and he could resume his work (A. S. P., December, 1907).

Even if both cases have been correctly reported they do not prove the existence of a new metapsychic power; they only indicate that the central nervous system has an unusual and quite extraordinary power on organic phenomena.

The question is complicated not only by the difficulty of estimating the curative power, but it has been further obscured by considerations of another kind. The enthusiasm of the crowds who visit Lourdes today and formerly went to the cemetery of St. Medard testifies that religious ideas dominate these miraculous cures.1

*Many "faith cures" are brought forward by Christian Science. This society was founded about t866 by Mrs. Mary Glover Eddy (December, 1910). See Ramacharaka (Yogi), The Science of Psychic Healing, Chicago, Yogi Publication Society, Masonic Temple, 1909. A dissident sect arose under Bishop Oliver Sabin, who wrote a number of books that went through many editions, Christology, Science of Health and Happiness, etc. Washington, thirty-second edition. But the point of departure of all these books is the

The cures claimed as resulting from advice by somnambulists constitute a regular traffic, increasing in all countries, though everywhere repressed by legislation as illegal medical practice.

The misuse of professional somnambulism is sufficient reason for excluding alleged cures after such advice from the list of authentic facts. It is, however, difficult to admit that the innumerable consultations of somnambulists in all countries could have grown to such an extent and become so general if there were not some small amount of medical clairvoyance in their advice. In default of this they would soon be abandoned. Moreover, these persons freely pass remarks on each other, such as "X. has great power of lucidity. Y. used to, but has not now. Z. has it but seldom, but on some days is very lucid." It would perhaps be unwise to reject with contempt the record of healing divination by somnambulists.

Still greater reserve should be observed in denying all clairvoyance in diagnosis. Somnambulists seem instinctively disposed to speak of the state of health of those round them. Even when their advice is not asked for they are inclined to say that such a one who speaks to them or touches them is suffering in the heart, the head, or the chest. Everything happens as though they felt the morbid affections of those near them by a kind of telepathy which is organic rather than psychic.

This organic telepathy is clearly manifest in all their words. Alice, who is neither a somnambulist nor a professional medium, exclaims, "I am stifled; I am distressed; it gives me spasms, cramps, or a lump in my throat," when a lock of hair from a sick person is given her. But all this is still too uncertain to allow of any affirmations with regard to lucidity in this special

work of Mrs. Mary Eddy which in 1898 had gone through one hundred and forty editions, Science and Health, with Key to the Scriptures, Boston, Armstrong, 1898. For a history of the movement see H. W. Dresser, Health and the Inner Life, New York, Putnam, 1906. For the miracles at Lourdes see Diday's Examen medical des miracles de Lourdes, Paris, Masson, 1873. Boissarie, Histoire medicate de Lourdes, 1858-1891, Paris, 1891. Baugher, Lourdes et un cas de tuberculose aigue generalisee {A. S. P., 1895, 156-158). Berteaux, Lourdes et la science. Revue de I'Hypn. et Psychol. Physiologiques, Paris, 1895, ix, 210-216 and 275-278. F. de Backer, Lourdes et les medecins, Paris, Maloine, 1905. E. Artus, Les miracles de Notre-Dame de Lourdes, guirison de Juliette Fournier, Paris, Palme, 1872. Histoire complete du dtfi a la libre pensie sur les miracles de Lourdes, Paris, Palme, 1877. Noriagof, Notre-Dame de Lourdes et la science de V occult e, Chanuel, Paris, 1898, and above all the works of H. Lasserre (one of the first who were cured at Lourdes), Notre-Dame de Lourdes, Paris, Palme, 1885, and new edition, Paris, Sanard, 2 vols., 1898.

form of cryptesthesia. If it were studied methodically and without prejudice, some curious results might appear. In fifty-three experiments of diagnosis of disease by somnambulists undertaken by me with every care to avoid all suggestion on my own part and all normal perspicacity by them, I had only very moderate results. Some were correct, but not so many as to exclude chance coincidences. In a case of strong diarrhea Eugenie said, "Inflammation of the intestine." On a child with measles, Helena said, "It is measles, I saw his face all red." The best of the experiments was number thirteen. Helena said, "Severe pain, choking, pain here (pointing to the epigastric region). There seems to be a sac that ought to be emptied; that sac under my heart gives me great pain." The case was one of tuberculosis, with an abscess full of pus, at the base of the left lung, accompanied by suffocation, dyspnea, and esophagitis. In all these cases the consultation was in the absence of the sick person; the investigation was psychometric (which I call pragmatic cryptesthesia); I gave the sensitive some object, a lock of hair, or a letter from the patient.

These results are imperfect, but in the numerous treatises on animal magnetism that appeared from 1825 to 1855 there are many records that should induce students of metapsychics (among whom there are numerous physicians) to re-open these experiments without fear of ridicule. The history of somnambulism and spiritualism shows how ill-advised official science has been in rejecting a priori, without examination, facts that have later on forced this acceptance.

There is a peculiar form of organic cryptesthesia which deserves attention. It was called "autoscopy" by the magnetizers of the first half of the nineteenth century; somnambulists seem able to see their organs and to give remarkable descriptions of them. This seems to belong to psychophysiology rather than to metapsychics.

In a normal state the visceral organs do not awake any precise sensations in our consciousness. The functions of the heart, lungs, liver, intestines, and the brain are inappreciable by consciousness, though physiology proves that the viscera have sensory nerves that convey to the nerve centres some notion of the state of these organs.

These impressions are indistinct. They certainly reach the spinal cord and the brain, but they seldom touch the consciousness. Only when disordered are we aware of the stomach, the intestines, or the liver. It is not for want of sensory nerves that this is so, but because the sensory nerves do not affect the consciousness. It may therefore be admitted as probable that in certain special psychophysiological conditions (e.g., hypnosis) the modified and amplified consciousness may be affected by visceral sensations.

Although autoscopy was currently observed from the beginning of magnetism, it was Fere who first used the word (?), though he applied it to the vision of his double by the patient who was probably hallucinated.1

This kind of hallucination (external autoscopy), though so interesting from the medical point of view, has no metapsychic significance. Some spiritualist theorists have endeavoured to ascribe to it an importance which it does not seem to me to possess.

Internal autoscopy, mentioned by Du Potet, was carefully studied by Dr. Comar2 and, later, by Dr. Sollier, who wrote an interesting monograph upon it.3

There is no need to examine here the detail in the modalities of autoscopy, for we are on the borderland between the psychic and the metapsychic; nor is there any need to imagine some new faculty of the mind or the nervous system to account for the representation of the viscera to visual consciousness. All the same, this leads to a curious inference.

If it is true that some persons, when hypnotized, hysterical, or otherwise abnormal, have a visual perception of their organs (and this fact, however unusual, must be considered proven), it must be admitted that in certain cases the hypnotized or hysterical patient can be aware of an organic lesion and diagnose its site by seeing that lesion. In fact magnetized patients often show a willingness to describe the extent and locality of their malady and to suggest remedies.

1Note sur les hallucinations autoscopiques ou spiculaires, et sur les hallucinations altruistes (Bull, de la Soc. de Biol, de Paris, 1891, 45 0-

2L' autoreprtsentation de I'organisme chez quelques hystcriques, Revue neurologique, 1901, 491.

*Les phenomenes d'autoscopie, Paris, Alcan, 1903. To avoid confusion, a distinction must be observed between external and internal autoscopy. It is external when the hallucinated subject sees his double outside himself. It is internal when the somnambulist perceives his own organs — heart, liver, intestines, etc., and describes them, whether pathologically or not.

It is even possible that the numerous and authenticated cases of auto-premonition may be due to this internal autoscopy. These auto-premonitions are not premonitions in the true sense of the word as employed in this book. Autoscopy enables a somnambulist to foresee the malady or death just in the same way as an experienced physician can foresee them.



3. Cryptesthesia Under Hypnotism

Experimental cryptesthesia can be studied in hypnotized persons and in mediums. The medium, during a seance, is usually in trance; but this spontaneous trance is singularly allied to the hypnotic state properly so called, as if the medium were selfhypnotized, without the aid of a magnetizer.

There is, however, no essential difference. The chief difference is that the medium thinks himself to be in relations with real personalities distinct from himself — his guides — who speak by his voice or write by his hand. However, with the hypnotized patient, as with the medium, there are different degrees in the dulling of the senses and diminution of consciousness.

Nevertheless the consciousness of many mediums seems to remain intact; they continue to converse with the persons who may be present while their subconsciousness elaborates other conversations and other acts manifest by muscular movements they are aware of but can scarcely control, as in automatic or planchette writing. I call this semi-somnambulism. Sometimes the dissociation between the normal conscious personality and the new personalities that appear is still more complex; for in some cases the medium will write coherent phrases answering to a personality, D., with the right hand; while with the left, he will write other coherent phrases from a personality, G. And during the whole time he appears normal, laughs, talks, sings, and discusses with the various people present in the circle.

Again, this dissociation of personality, whether in somnambulism or in semi-somnambulism, is not metapsychical; it belongs to psychology. It can be accounted for by a doubling, or more rarely, by a tripling of the personality — a fact that has often been verified. We are here considering the manifestation of lucidity (i.e., of cryptesthesia), rather than these variations in the personality; and the proofs of this astounding cryptesthesia are so numerous and so certain, that a selection must be made from among them and only the chief ones quoted.1



(a) Experiments on Hypnotized Subjects

In the early days of animal magnetism the old magnetizers insisted on the existence of clairvoyance or lucidity. I will cite a few cases only.2

General Noizet (quoted by Flammarion, loc. tit., 339), states, in 1842, that a somnambulist told him accurately what he had done during the day, his acts not being at all usual. He had been at the Tuileries in the apartments of the Duke de Montpensier, the king's son; and thence in a carriage with the duke to the Invalides to study certain models of fortifications. All was very exactly detailed, but too much at length to be reproduced here.

According to a letter from Dr. Despine3 to M. Charpignon, Mme. Schmitz being ill, at Geneva, asked Dr. Julliard to write out an opinion for her. Dr. Julliard, in complete darkness, placed the paper beneath her feet. She said, "My light is there!" and read what Dr. Julliard had written. Charpignon cites other cases of clairvoyance or transposition of the senses. But the precautions then taken were not so stringent as they now are, and doubt is permissible or even obligatory.

It is necessary to be very cautious in drawing conclusions. I will here recall an instance of cryptesthesia that probably involves an error; it will serve to indicate the precautions necessary for a good experiment.

In the presence of M. Legludic, director of the School of Medicine at Angers, Dr. Binet Sangle made some experiments on cryptesthesia. Two subjects, O. and M., were present. M. was

*I may be permitted a certain preference for my own experiments; and must apologize for the large space here given to them, but some are unpublished, and I think, deserve to be remembered.

2In old journals of magnetism (German, English, French, and Italian) numerous cases of lucidity are reported; but it is not certain that the blindfolding was such as always to obscure the sight completely. Even when a wad of cotton-wool was placed on each side of the nose, the wad might be displaced enough to permit some little vision. However little, it would be too much. It is probable that the clairvoyance of Pigeaire's little girl was authentic, but the proof is insufficient. See Journal du magnetisme animal, by J. J. A. Ricard, Paris, Bourgogne & Martinet, 1840, and Toulouse, 1839, vol. t, p. 624.

^Physiologic, mcdecine et mStaphysique du magnetisme. Paris, J. Bailliere, 1848, 114.

put to sleep facing the wall, and her eyes bandaged. Dr. Legludic then opened a book at random and underlined the word "vulture/' Without saying anything Dr. Binet Sangle drew the head of a vulture, and M. said, "It is a curious bird, it has no wings, it is a vulture." In another experiment, again opening the book at random, M. J. underlined "slug." M. said, "It is a slug." In a still more remarkable experiment M. J. underlined the verse, "Souffle bise, tombe a flots, pluie!" O, said "S...SS...S..." and at last, "Souffle bise.

Finally in the same book, opened as before at random, M. J. underlined, "Le Dieu ne viendra pas. L'Eglise est renversee." M. then said, "Le Dieu ne viendra pas." 1

This experiment would be decisive if there were not possible or probable complicity between O. and M., both of whom were present. Neither can the experiments with the Misses Creery be admitted as valid: wilful or unconscious complicity must always be allowed for in such experiments on cryptesthesia.

William Gregory,2 professor of chemistry at the University of Edinburgh, verified that Major Buckley was able to develop lucidity in several hypnotizable subjects sufficiently to enable them to read correctly mottoes, letters, addresses, and postmarks, enclosed in envelopes or in shut boxes of wood or cardboard. In one case Sir T. Wiltshire had written "concert" intending to write "correct." The seer read it as "concert." Sir T. Wiltshire said this was an error, but on opening the box the word was seen to be "concert." The statistics given by Major Buckley would be decisive if there were no possibility of error in the methods employed. Mottoes in 4,680 nut-shells, totalling about 36,000 words, were read.

Herbert Mayo, an eminent English doctor and physiologist, sent to an American friend in Paris a lock of hair from one of his patients, Colonel C. A somnambulist in Paris stated that C. was suffering from partial paralysis of the hips and legs and was in the habit of using a surgical instrument for another ailment.

If I cite this case of lucidity, it is not that it is more remarkable than many others, but because it is attested by an experienced

xExper. sur la transmission directe de la pensee, A. S. P., 1902, xii, 131143.

2LetUrs to a candid inquirer on animal magnetism (1851) cite par E. Boirac, in A. S. P., 1893, i". 242-

physiologist, Dr. Mayo, and convinced him that lucidity is a fact.1

Dr. Dufay of Blois had some good examples of cryptesthesia with a non-professional somnambulist, named Marie.2

He received one morning a letter from an officer friend who was laid up in his tent from dysentery. He enclosed the letter in two blank envelopes and put it, the same evening, into the hands of Marie. She said that it concerned a soldier suffering from dysentery; and going to find him, she imagined herself going on board ship, was sea-sick, saw some "women in white garments,,, with beards (Arabs, no doubt). She saw the officer, very thin and pale, on a bed made of three planks on stumps above the moist sand.

The other instance reported by Dr. Dufay is yet more remarkable: A prisoner in Blois jail had just committed suicide by strangling himself with his necktie. Dr. Dufay cut off a piece of this necktie, put it in several folds of paper, and gave it to Marie. She declared that it was something that had killed a man, a cord — no, a cravat; it belongs to a prisoner who hanged himself because he had assassinated a man. She said that he had killed his victim with a hatchet, and indicated the place where the hatchet had been thrown away. The hatchet was found in the place described.

Bozzano (A. S. P., 1910, 120), quotes Dr. Vidigal of Sao Paulo, Brazil, who brought to his house a young servant aged twelve, who had just arrived as an emigrant from Spain. The evening of her arrival she was put to sleep by a friend of Dr. Vidigal and saw an old woman whose description tallied with Dr. Vidigal's mother, three months dead. The girl added that in this woman's room there was a silk dress and in a pocket sewn into it, seventy-five milreis. On entering this room, which no one had entered for a long while, the silk dress and the seventyfive milreis were found. It is to be noted that Dr. Vidigal had barely been able to meet the expenses of his mother's funeral.

In 1837, at New York, Loraine Brackett of Dudley, a young woman, who was completely blinded by an injury, when hypnotized made mental journeys that showed her lucidity. She was able to describe exactly a picture seen by Mr. Stone in another town representing three Indians round an enormous tree-trunk

Quoted by Boirac, La Metagnomie {A. S. P., November, 1916, 159-162). *C. Wallace, he. ext., tr. fr., 92.

with hieroglyphs upon it. Loraine said: "Three Indians sitting in a hollow tree which looks as if it had been dug out on purpose; and the tree filled with marks." Only Mr. Stone knew this picture.1

Mrs. E. H. Sidgwick mentions several cases of magnetic lucidity given by Jane (A. S. P., 1891, i, 280). They are very interesting, and the article by Mrs. Sidgwick may be referred to for the full detail. Dr. F. who magnetized Jane warned one of his patients, Mr. Eglinton, that he would ask Jane what Mr. E. was doing between eight and ten o'clock that evening. Jane said, "I see a very fat man with a wooden leg, he has no brain. He is called Eglinton. He is sitting before a table where there is brandy, but he is not drinking." A very curious result: for Mr. E. who is very thin, had made a corpulent dummy and placed it before a table with a bottle of brandy.

Alexis, in a series of fourteen seances at Brighton, played at cards, naming the cards of his opponents as well as his own, though his eyes were blindfolded, gave lines out of a closed book, and described the contents of shut boxes.

Robert Houdin, the celebrated conjurer, had an interview with Alexis. Houdin drew a book from his pocket, and, opening it, required Alexis to read a line eight pages back at a certain level, which he marked by inserting a pin. This was done and Houdin found the feat stupefying. He signed the declaration, "I affirm that the above facts are scrupulously accurate."

Houdin, after verifying that the phenomena of clairvoyance displayed by Alexis could not be imitated by any conjurer, says that Dr. Chomel, having shown Alexis a certain medal, Alexis told him, "That medal was given to you under peculiar circumstances. You were then a student in a garret at Lyons. A workman whom you had done a service offered you the medal which he had found in some ruins." This was exactly true (Delanne, Recheches sur la mediumnite, 1902, 236).

Alexis gave President Seguier a proof of lucidity (not telepathy) of a very curious kind. Alexis, mentally travelling to the President's room, saw a handbell on the table. "No," said M. Seguier, "there is no handbell." But on returning home that afternoon he found that a handbell had been placed on his table. The President had not given his name (Delaage, Les my stives du magnetisms).

Animal magnetism. Letter of Mr. Stone to Dr. Bigham, P. A. S. P. R., 1907, 106.

Many other proofs of the extraordinary powers of lucidity possessed by Alexis are reported by Flammarion; and Dr. Bertrand, the magnetizers Petetin and Lafontaine, and especially Dr. Frapart have noted so many varied and striking instances that it is impossible to doubt the wonderful metapsychic faculties of Alexis Didier.

Robert Houdin, who was certainly one of the most expert conjurers of any day, verified and attested the clairvoyance of Alexis, who not only told the cards that Houdin held in his hand, but those he was about to draw from a new pack.1

Alphonse Karr and Victor Hugo obtained decisive proofs of cryptesthesia with Alexis, hypnotized by Marillat. The testimony of Alphonse Karr and Victor Hugo would be insufficient if it referred only to a game at cards played with Alexis, for clever prestidigitation can do anything of the kind, but there is much more; Alexis told Alphonse Karr that he (Karr) had placed a branch of white azalea in an empty bottle before leaving his house; which was the fact. Victor Hugo had prepared a packet tied up with string in which he had written the word "politique"; this was read by Alexis. Alexandre Dumas also tells of a memorable seance, but his testimony is less precise.

Alexis,2 when M. Vivant came to consult him, said that he had come concerning some lost object — four banknotes of one thousand francs — which was correct, and he added, "Do not complain to the police, no one has stolen them, they have fallen behind a drawer in your desk." M. Vivant, on returning home, found them there.

I cannot at all understand why Hyslop declines to admit Alexis* cryptesthesia since he attests such complete and perfect cryptesthesia in Mrs. Piper (Enigmas of Psychical Research, Boston, 1906, 274). M. Osty has given much evidence of the conditions of hypnosis and lucidity of Mme. M. (Lucidite et intuition, Etude experimental, Paris, Alcan); he is also about to publish a work in which the fine cases of lucidity by Mme. M. will be completely described. I know of some that are striking. But in the book already published representing so much patient work,

^Confidences d'un prestidigitateur, une vie d'artiste, Paris, libr. Nouvelle, 1859, 2 vols. If the journals of the time are inaccessible, the study by Camille Flammarion, La mort et son mystere, 1920, i, 209-233, may be read with profit.

2Cited by Delaage, Le sommeil magnetique. After Bozzano, Dei fenomeni di telestesia, Luce e Ombra, 1920, xx, 124.

there is not a single case that can be quoted as evidence of lucidity. It is probable, according to what he says, that Mme. M. Freya and M. Flouriere gave him many, but we have to take his word for them. However, on p. 304, he cites a case that seems positive, but omits to tell us how far the statements of the sensitive were correct.

Dr. Souza Couta of Lisbon, in a seance at which Dr. O., also of Lisbon, was present, asked the entranced medium to visit Dr. O.'s house. The medium said that he (or she) saw two ladies, one of whom was a girl, reading a book — Le Diable a la cour. He described the room, a dining-room containing two vases, which he described, and a piano {A. S. P., 1905, xv, 707).

M. Melvil Roux, an architect, relates that he had the opportunity of seeing a woman of about sixty, a servant, magnetized by M. Salles, a bookseller of Nimes. Three years before M. Roux had been charged with some repairs to the funeral crypt of the college at Alais. The subject described this crypt, and looked in, despite her fear; she said at once, "There is snow" (it was chalk) and then, that there were some sacerdotal vestments. She also read some words (Flammarion, loc. cit., 329).

Dariex cites the lucidity of a woman named Marie. The magnetizer gave her various orders which were carried out. One day a watch was hidden in a bookcase. She went to the bookcase, found the watch and returned, showing her pleasure. The order had been given mentally. Another time, also in obedience to a mental order, she fetched a glass, and filled it with water, adding a few drops of eau-de-Cologne.

In 1850 eleven fishing boats left Peterhead for whaling; a person in the magnetic sleep said that the first boat back would be the Hamilton Ross, and that the second mate, Mr. Cardno, had lost some fingers by an accident; both of which statements proved correct (A. S. P., 1891, i, 270). One of my relatives, a distinguished magistrate, told me that in his youth he had heard the old nurse of one of his friends, in a somnambulic state, announce that the brother of that friend, an officer of engineers, then before Sebastopol, had been seriously wounded in the right arm; it was so.

