At the other pole of the so-called occult sciences is spiritualism; and here the facts must be dissociated from theories. Spiritualism, according to the formula of Allan Kardec and others, is a theory leading to a religion; but this takes us very far beyond science. Not that metapsychics should abjure all theory; no science, however young, can dispense altogether with theories, even hypothetical theories, but theory must always be subordinate to the facts; it must never dominate them and look on them as accessory to a religion. This was what the founders of metapsychic science — Gurney, Myers, and Crookes — endeavoured to achieve.

Neither the magnetizers nor the spiritualists should be contemned. That would be a grave injustice. They carried out laborious investigations that are the foundation of metapsychics, disregarding ridicule, hostility, and the rejection of their work by official science.

But we have reached a new stage. It is no longer admissible that a new medium should be developed by a small circle without the methods employed in all sciences — scales, photography, cinematography, and graphic diagrams. Similarly, rigorous and exhaustive enquiry, such as is carried out by the S. P. R., is indispensable for all subjective phenomena. Complete certitude is required, half-certitudes will not do.

In fine, modern metapsychics should be limited on the subjective side to the psychological phenomena that conscious human intelligence, however keen, is incapable of producing; and on the objective side to material facts produced apparently by intelligent causes that the known and classified natural forces (light, heat, electricity, gravitation, and mechanical power) are unable to explain.

In this brief historical summary I have not been able to indicate the work that has been done. Its bibliography is already enormous. I should like, however, to indicate, to those who wish to study the spiritualism, the occultisms, and the metapsychics of the half century that has now elapsed, the chief works dealing with the subject, all of them useful and some indispensable. Only leading works are here mentioned:

Aksakoff, Animismus nnd Spiritismus, Versuch einer Kritischen Priifung der mediumnistischen Phaenomene, Leipzig, Mutze, 1890, 4th ed., in two vols., 1902, trad, fr., Libr. des sciences psychologiques, 1895. E. Bozzano, Ipotesi spiritica e teorie sciontifiche, Genova, Donath, 1903. A. Brofferio, Per lo spiritismo, 1st ed., Milano, Briola, 1892, 3d ed., Torino, Bocca, 1903, trad, all., Berlin, 1894. G. Delanne, Le spiritisme devant la science, Paris, Chanuel, 1895, 5th ed., 1897, Les apparitions materialisees, Paris, Leymarie, 2 vols., 8vo, 1911. Recherches sur la mediumnite, Paris, 1896. Fr. Myers, The human personality and its survival to bodily death, London, Longmans, 2 vols., 8vo, 1902. Oliver Lodge, La survivancc humaine. A. de Rochas, Lextcriorisation de la motricitc, Paris, Chanuel, 1896, 4th ed., 1906. Lextcriorisation de la scnsibilitc, Paris, Chanuel, 1895, 5th ed., Chacornac, 1905. Les etats profonds de Vhypnose, Paris, Chacornac, 1892. Les etats superacids de Vhypnose, Paris, Chacornac, 1902. J. Maxwell, Les phenomenes psychiques. Recherches, observations, mcthodes, Paris, Alcan, 1905, Metapsychical Phenomena, London, Duckworth, 1905. E. Boirac, Lavenir des sciences psychiques, Paris, Alcan, 1907. La psychologic inconnue, Paris, Alcan, 1915. Carmelo Samona, Psiche misteriosa: i fenomeni detti spiriticci, Palermo, Reber, 1910. E. Flammarion, Les forces naturelles inconnues, Flammarion, Paris, 1907. Linconnu et les probllmes psychiques, Paris, Flammarion, 1900. La mort et son mystlre, Paris, 1920. Morton Prince, A dissociation of personality, Boston, Turner, 1906. Z611ner, Wisscnschaff tliche Abhandlungen, part iii, Die transcendentale Physik und die sogenanntc Philosophic, Leipzig, Stachmann, 1878-1879. J. H. Hyslop, Science and a future life, Boston, Turner, 1905. Innocenzo Calderone, La Rincamazione, Milano, edit. Veritas, 1913. Stainton Moses (Oxon), The higher aspects of spiritualism, London, 1880. Spirit identity, London (Spiritualist alliance, 1902). G. Geley, De Vinconscient au conscient, Paris, Alcan, 1919. Letre subconscient, 4th ed., Paris, 1919. J. Grasset, Loccultisme hier et aujourd'hui, Montpellier, Coulet,

1908. Osty, Lucidite et intuition, Paris, Alcan, s. d. Florence Marryat, There is no death, Leipzig, Heinemann, 1892. Chevreul, On nc meurt pas, Paris, 1914. S. Ottolenghi, La suggestion a le facolta psichiche occult e in rap port o alia pratica legale e medico forense, Torinb, Bocca, 1900. Amiral Usborne Moore, Glimpses of the next state, London, Watts & Co., 1912. Du Prel, Das Rathsel des Menschen, Leipzig, Mutze, 1885, trad, it., Milano, Galli, 1894. Monistische Seeleneehre; ein Beitrag auf Losung des Menschenrdthsels, Leipzig, Giinther, 1888. L. Denis, Apres la mort, expose de la doctrine des esprits, dern. ed., 1918, Paris, Leymarie, trad, ital., Milano, 1914. Fr. Podmore, Modern spiritualism; a history and a criticism, London, Methuen, 2 vols., 1902. Wahu, Le spiritisme dans lantiquitc, et dans les temps modernes, Paris, Leymarie, 2 vols., 1885. Schrenck-Notzing, Physikalische Phaenomenc des Mcdhimnismus, Munich, Reinhardt, 1920.

Some idea of the volume of metapsychic literature may be formed by adding to this short bibliography, which I shall have occasion to supplement in the course of the present work, the important articles published in Light (London), in the Banner of Light (Boston), The Religio-philosophical Journal (New York), the Harbinger of Light (Melbourne), the Revue Spirite, Paris, Revue scientifique et morale du spiritisme (Paris), the Luce e Ombra (Milan, a noteworthy record), the Zeitschrift fiir Spiritismus (Leipzig), and Psychische Studien (Berlin).

I cannot mention all the books that have appeared since 1920 on metapsychics; it will suffice to quote the following:

C. Flammarion, Apres la mort, Paris, 1922. G. Vourniquel, Les tcmoins posthumes, Paris, Leymarie, 1921. M. Maeterlinck, Le Grand Secret, Paris, Fasquelle, 1921. Freud, Introduction to Psycho-analysis. Oesterreich, Der Occultismus im Modernen Weltbild, Sibyllen-Verlag, Dresden, 1921. P. Heuze, Les Morts Vivent Us? Renaissance, Paris, 1922. F. Heslop, Further Messages Across the Borderline, Taylor, London, 1921. L. Farigoule, La vision extra-retinienne et le sens paroptique, Nouvelle Revue,

1920. Tischer, Monismus und Occultismus, Mutze, Leipzig,

1921. Tassacher, Occultismus und Spiritismus, Stuttgart, 1921. Lewis Baylis Paton, Spiritism and the Cult of the Dead in Antiquity, London, Hodder & Stoughton, 1921. Evelyn Underhill,

The Life of the Spirit and the Life of the Day, London, Methuen, 1921. Walter F. Prince, Spiritualism and the New Psychology, American S. P. R., 1922, p. 72. J. Maxwell, Magie, Paris, Flammarion, 1921.

In most of these, Flammarion's fine work excepted, there is much more nebulosity than precision. Those who wish to be informed of new facts will find them in the numerous reviews that devote themselves specially to this subject.



4. Mediums

This term "medium," which signifies an intermediary between this world of the living and the world of the dead, is execrable, but too firmly fixed to be abandoned. In the course of this book many details will be found which have not found a place in this chapter which is necessarily abbreviated to avoid repetition elsewhere. The history of mediums covers nearly all metapsychics. There is a great difference between powerful mediums such as Home, Eusapia, Stainton Moses, and Florence Cook, who manifest surprising objective and energetic phenomena, and those who show only subjective phenomena. It is therefore necessary to place physical mediums who show telekinesis and materializations in a class by themselves.

Such mediums are very rare; even those who can give raps without contact are not common.

Their psycho-physiology does not tell us much; it is not possible to say whether they are more or less intelligent than average persons. Nothing distinguishes them from others, except their strange power of producing materializations (hands and shapes of persons), and movements of matter (noises, raps, voices, and scents) in spiritist seances.

The extreme rarity of telekinetic powers is not a matter for suspicion; we must perforce admit that all men are not alike. Some children show at a very early age astounding powers of memory and calculation. It is easy to admit that in the mass of humanity there must be exceptional individuals.

Cryptesthetic are much more common than the telekinetic faculties. Cryptesthesia of all degrees is so widespread, and telekinesis is so rare, that the persons showing the latter powers cannot be classed along with those showing the former.

We shall therefore class mediums in two distinct groups:

1. Mediums showing physical phenomena.

2. Mediums showing psychical phenomena.

Telekinesis is sharply defined; materialization still more so, but the elementary form of telekinesis, rapping, which is a sonorous vibration (without contact) in the wood of a table or, a chair, without the power of raising objects or producing materializations, is not infrequent; but even here it is difficult to draw a precise line dividing those mediums who can and those who cannot produce raps, for very slight noises are often heard when a medium is scarcely touching the table, noises so slight that one can hardly be sure of them.

It would be desirable here to touch on the biography of the great mediums noted for materializations and telekinesis, but we must defer this to the chapter on materializations.

To mention Home, Florence Cook, Stainton Moses, Eusapia, Mme. d'Esperance, Eglinton, Linda Gazzera, Slade, Marthe Beraud, Miss Goligher, and Stanislawa Tomczyk is to name nearly all; it is obvious that they are but few. The number of those who give raps is very much larger, but I have no statistics regarding them.

Unfortunately physical mediums often misuse their powers; they think to enrich themselves and give public seances for profit. The Fox sisters, the Davenport brothers, Eglinton, and Slade all did this, and from thence to fraud is but a step that has often been taken, so that professional mediums of this class are always to be looked upon with suspicion and the most rigid precautions must always be taken against trickery. Indeed this is always necessary, even when there is no possible suspicion of conscious fraud.

There are, however, excellent reasons for not refusing to experiment with leading professional mediums.

1. At the outset of their careers the phenomena produced must certainly have been genuine. Leah, Margaret, and Kate Fox would not of set purpose have invented the Hydesville rappings had they not originally had genuine ones.

2. Mediums like Mme. d'Esperance, Florence Cook, Linda, Eusapia, and Marthe Beraud had never had a lesson in legerdemain or illusionism. They experienced some strange phenomena and almost in spite of themselves followed the path opened before them. Only in order to discredit the facts has extraordinary skill been attributed to them, a skill greater than that of expert conjurers like Robert Houdin, Hamilton, and Maskelyne, sufficient to deceive the most alert men of science in a way that Houdin, Hamilton, or Maskelyne have not been able to imitate.

As to mediums producing psychical effects only, every shade between them and normal persons is observable. It would even seem that quite normal persons once in their lives may have some passing lucidity; but not to depart overmuch from usual language we will provisionally apply the term "medium" only to those persons who consider themselves to be in relations with extraneous personalities.

Conformably to this we have defined metapsychics as the science whose subject-matter is phenomena which seem to arise from an intelligence other than the human intelligence. Mediums are therefore those persons who, in partial or total unconsciousness, speak words, perform actions, and make gestures that seem not to be under control of their will and to be independent of their intelligence. Nevertheless these unconscious phenomena show intelligence and system, and are sometimes most aptly co-ordinated. Therefore the first thing to be discovered is whether they are due to a human or to a super-human intelligence.

To take a well-known and concrete example: Helen Smith writes automatically long messages that she attributes to Marie Antoinette. Is this done by Helen Smith's own intelligence, or by another? Is it Marie Antoinette or some other that governs Helen Smith's words, gestures, and writing?

We shall discuss these two hypotheses later on. For the present we shall show that there are gradual, almost indescribable gradations between these so-called mediums and normal persons. It is not only difficult, but impossible, to draw a line of demarcation; whereas between physical mediums and normal persons there is the chasm of an essential difference.

The grades of subjective mediumship may be classified as follows:

(A) The first departure from the normal consists in slight, almost imperceptible, muscular movements, sufficient, however, to enable an experienced person to recognize unconscious sensation and will in the subject under observation. There are certainly more than fifty per cent, of normal persons who reveal their thoughts by slight muscular tremors of which they are unconscious, as in the "willing game," which sometimes gives surprising results. These involuntary movements are so frequently and clearly observable that they belong to normal physiology and not to metapsychics.

(B) The second degree consists in the creation of a new personality by hypnotism. The normal personality reappears on awaking, but under hypnotism and hypnotic suggestion a new personality appears which is evidently factitious, since the magnetizer imposes it at will and can maintain it by verbal suggestion. This artificial and transitory personality also belongs to normal official psychology.

(C) The third degree is a mediumistic state, i.e., a new personality is created by auto-suggestion. Hypnotism acts through hetero-suggestion; mediumship by auto-suggestion. There is very little difference between the personality of Marie Antoinette as assumed by Helen Smith of her own accord, and the same personality as aroused by suggestion of a hypnotizer.

Automatic writings belong to this group and there is no ground for giving this important psychological manifestation a place in metapsychics, at least in regard to the mere fact of writing, for in most of these cases the need for the hypothesis of an extraneous non-human intelligence does not arise. Since I can suggest to Alice that she is Marie Antoinette and she enacts admirably the part of the unhappy queen, why should I suppose that the Queen of France is incarnate in Helen Smith when she assumes that character of her own motion and plays it equally well? The supposition is gratuitous and infantile.

(D) The fourth step is when the new personality shows cryptesthesia and really seems to know things unknown to the medium, and even things that the secondary personality alone could be aware of, as in the case of Mrs. Piper incarnating Phinuit or George Pelham.

The "guide" of the medium (i.e., the new personality that appears) then seems to be a genuinely extraneous intelligence. These phenomena can rightly be called metapsychic because, taking them all in all, the normal intelligence of the sensitive is quite insufficient to explain the strange and potent cryptesthesia. I need scarcely remark that the notion that an extraneous force is in play is only a hypothesis.

(E) Perhaps it would be as well to reserve the name "medium" for those who produce mechanical movement without contact and materializations. This is the fifth degree; in which levitations.

telekinesis, hallucinations pertaining to the spiritist trance (akin to the hypnotic trance) and materializations appear side by side with cryptesthesia.

There is still nothing to prove that the secondary personalities may not be exclusively human and due to modalities of human intelligence; whereas the physical phenomena show something really new and metapsychic, transcending normal psychology, and by no means explicable without the intervention of unknown powers that appear to be intelligent.

As this book claims to be a working treatise, I shall, in order to give clear ideas, instance some examples of transition from the normal to the mediumistic state.

First degree. Antoinette is not hypnotizable; but if I take her hand and ask her to think of some object that she has hidden in a corner of the room, she is much astonished when I discover that object, guided by her unconscious movements.

Second degree. Alice is hypnotized. If I suggest that she is an old general, she caricatures an old general — coughs, spits, speaks roughly, swears, calls for a drink, etc. She will play this simple farce for an hour at a time.

Third degree. Helen Smith has become Marie Antoinette by auto-suggestion. She moves with dignity, speaks the language, and reproduces nearly the writing and spelling of the queen. In perfect good faith she plays this role for weeks or months.

Mme. Camus puts her hand on the table and feverishly writes long phrases automatically; she does not know what she writes and talks of other things while writing. A certain Vincent is supposed to be the spirit-guide of these commonplace philosophical and theosophical dissertations.

Fourth degree. Mrs. Piper gradually loses her normal consciousness; then Phinuit, or George Pelham, Myers, or R. Hodgson speak through her. But these personalities, though probably imaginary and arising from auto-suggestion, have astonishing cryptesthetic powers. The words spoken by them through the voice of Mrs. Piper, show telepathy, monitions, premonitions, and all kinds of lucidity, so that rationalism (which is itself perhaps an error), finds the greatest difficulty not to ascribe the almost superhuman intelligence displayed to some extraneous source.

Mrs. Leonard, Mme. Briffaut, Stella, and the Seeress of Prevorst are all mediums of this kind.

Fifth degree. Eusapia falls into a trance without being hypnotized. Then by the agency of John King, as she says, she moves objects without touching them; she materializes the hands, and sometimes the head of John King. Other phantoms sometimes appear. Home, Mme. d'Esperance, Florence Cook, Stainton Moses, Stanislawa Tomczyk, Miss Goligher, and Marthe Beraud are mediums of the same order. Frequently cryptesthesia of divers kinds appears side by side with the physical and mechanical results. The domination by an extraneous intelligence seems complete, alike by the cognition of things unknown to the medium herself and by the abnormal powers over matter.

Indeed true mediums (of the physical order) are often sensitives also; they have remarkable cryptesthetic faculties. Stainton Moses and Home showed this. Eusapia showed only mechanical and physical phenomena, Mrs. Piper only psychological.

Without drawing any inference, it must be admitted as a fact that powerful mediums attribute their powers to a "guide/' whether those powers be mechanical, objective, or subjective; and in order to carry out successful experiments, it is necessary to act as though this guide were really existent and incarnated in the medium. This is a working hypothesis in the strictest sense, nearly always essential to the production of the phenomena.

Science, it has been said, is only accuracy of language. Therefore we ought not to use the same word to describe persons so different as Eusapia and Mrs. Piper. We might call those who give physical effects, mediums; those who show cryptesthetic effects which they attribute to extraneous forces, sensitives; and those who (without cryptesthesia), present, by automatic writing, secondary personalities that seem spontaneous, but are doubtless created by auto-suggestion, automatists.

This classification, like all others, is arbitrary. Sensitives are always automatists also, though the converse is not true. Hundreds of cases might be cited of automatic writing which are but moderately interesting examples of released subconsciousness, destitute of cryptesthesia and lucidity, and in no way noteworthy except for the extraordinary powers of the subconscious.

In spite of my strong desire to refer metapsychic phenomena as far as possible to the domain of normal psychology, I do not wish to curtail or misrepresent them on rationalist grounds. The dominance of a single idea and the state of automatism induced by trance, whether hypnotic or spiritist, creates such extraordinary aptitudes for cryptesthesia that one is really tempted to believe in an extraneous intelligence in such cases as those of Mrs. Piper, Mrs. Leonard, and Mrs. Verrall. This question will not be discussed here; later on I shall treat it fearlessly.

Neither sensitives, nor automatists, nor even mediums show any special signs; they are like other people. Age, sex, and nationality do not seem to influence the matter.

Hysteria has often been invoked; but unless we assign an unwarrantable extension to this morbid state, it does not seem favourable to the phenomena. Hysterics are often hypnotizable, but so are most people. Mediums are more or less neuropaths, liable to headaches, insomnia, or dyspepsia; but this signifies very little. I entirely refuse to consider them morbid persons as P. Janet is too disposed to do. Certainly they show some dissociations of consciousness; but such analogous dissociations with partial automatism are common enough among artists, men of science, and many ordinary individuals.

J. Maxwell has insisted on a certain mark in the iris of most mediums, and it might be worth while to make some statistical research on this; but there will always be the difficulty of knowing where to stop, for there is no line of demarcation possible between sensitives and automatists on the one hand and normal persons on the other. One automatist does nothing but trace circles; another writes incoherent words; a third will write connected sentences; a fourth composes short poems; while a fifth will write a book or a novel. There are all possible degrees in automatism. The talents of the unconscious show even more variety than those of consciousness.

Cryptesthesia also admits of many gradations. A person who has been perfectly normal during the whole of a long life may one day see a veridical apparition or hear a premonitory voice. He cannot be called "a sensitive," though he has been such for a few minutes or seconds. Persons apparently normal look into the crystal and after a short time perceive dramatic scenes in the little glass sphere. One cannot say that they are sensitives, or that they are not; but here also there is no need to invoke an external agency, even to explain the fact.

Even great sensitives like Mrs. Piper or Stainton Moses have no distinguishing physiological characteristics. These privileged persons who, according to spiritualist ideas, enter into communication with the dead, do not show any other physical or mental superiority. The facility with which their consciousness suffers dissociation indicates a certain mental instability, and their responsibility while in a state of trance is somewhat diminished; but these are only shades of character, and I infer that apart from their visions, trances, and other manifestations they are much as other people.

Their sensitiveness has usually been discovered by chance. It would be very interesting to work out the details of the origins of mediumship. Every prominent case would, no doubt, show very different points of departure, but never that they have become mediums of set purpose. The power develops spontaneously.

It is curious, and discouraging, to find that their powers do not increase. They arise spontaneously, no one knows how or why. If the fancy takes them, so to speak, they simply disappear; no effort can retain them. "Katie King" left Florence Cook and Sir William Crookes, merely stating that she must leave them. My regretted and learned friend, Dr. Segard, told me that his young daughter of twelve showed remarkable telekinetic phenomena (levitation of a heavy table, raps, movements of objects without contact) for three days only, after which the whole power vanished. This was twenty-five years ago and the lady has never had any such later experiences. Training seems inoperative; I am even inclined to think that our efforts to regularize the phenomena bring more disadvantages than advantages. Hence in my own experiments I have entirely given up all attempts to indicate how the sensitive or the medium should act. A medium must be left to take his own way; our influence, if we have any, would probably be unsatisfactory. A powerful medium is a very delicate instrument of whose secret springs we know nothing, and clumsy handling may easily disorganize its working. It is best to allow the phenomena to develop in their own way without any attempts at guidance. It is probably a great mistake to try to educate mediumship.

Why is this? It does not seem to me that we can necessarily infer the intervention of an external intelligence. Even with normal children and youths the power of education is, perhaps fortunately, very limited.

Mediums have not hitherto been treated with justice; they have been slandered, ridiculed, and vilified. They have been treated as animcu viles for experiment. When their faculties faded away they have been left to die in obscurity and want; when rewarded it has been with a niggardly hand, giving them to understand that they are only instruments. It is time that this inhuman treatment should cease.

If by any chance a powerful physical medium or sensitive were discovered, instead of leaving such a one to the curiosity of the ignorant, to journalists, and to ladies who consult them on a lost dog or a faithless lover, they should be assured of liberal board and lodging, or perhaps more, in order to prevent their mediumship being degraded by base necessities. Mme. Bisson has done this for Marthe Beraud; Lord Dunraven did the same for Home, and E. Imoda for Linda. In short, mediums should be claimed for science — severe, just, and generous science — instead of allowing their wonderful faculties to be prostituted by childish credulity or damaging contempt.

At the same time there should be no relaxation of scientific strictness, without demanding astounding experiments, or excursions into the beyond. We must resign ourselves to earth-conditions. Metapsychic phenomena should be treated as problems of pure physiology. Let us experiment with these rare, privileged, and wonderful persons and remember that they deserve to be treated with all respect, but also that they must never be trusted.



Book II. Subjective Metapsychics



Chapter I. On Subjective Metapsychics in General



1. The Limits of Psychic and Metapsychic Science

A primary difficulty confronts us, for as soon as we can explain any phenomena of lucidity by extreme acuteness of intelligence or by systematic treatment of the subconscious, it is clear that there is no need to refer it to metapsychics, i.e., to assume unknown faculties or the intervention of external intelligences. It will suffice to say that it is only the effect of exceptional human acuteness. We are therefore bound first to investigate the limits to human intelligence.

This is exceedingly difficult, for many intellectual phenomena occur quite apart from consciousness; and these have belonged to normal psychology since the time of Leibnitz. The mind can work without the assistance of consciousness; very complex intellectual processes take place unknown to us, and a whole world of ideas vibrates in us of which we are unconscious. Probably no remembrance of the past is completely effaced; consciously we forget much, but memory forgets nothing; the mass of past impressions is retained almost intact, though consciousness of them has vanished. For the subconsciousness wakes and works side by side with sleeping consciousness, and there can be no doubt that comparisons, associations, and judgments are formed in which the conscious self takes no part. The importance of these phenomena of the subconscious cannot be over-emphasized; but as everything that can be explained by normal psychology should be eliminated from metapsychics, and as the subconscious work of the mind pertains to normal psychology, we must lay down and always remember the law — subconsciousness is competent to do everything that consciousness can do.

Our senses give us our notions of things, and we know those things by what our senses bring us — Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu; but rearrangements of sensorial data may make our notions extremely complex. Thus the subconscious can construct poetry, discourses, drama, and mathematics— everything that consciousness can construct. Nevertheless all this wealth is reconstructive; intelligence, whether conscious or subconscious, can never furnish more than it has been given unless we suppose some new faculty of cognition to exist. Intelligence can only work on material supplied by normal sensorial channels.

To quote a well-known simile, a mill is excellent for grinding, but can never produce anything but what it has been given to grind.

Let us suppose that Helen Smith has never heard a word of Sanscrit nor read or seen any Sanscrit book. Then if she should speak or write in Sanscrit — i.e., re-invent that language — I should consider the event miraculous, and a metapsychic phenomenon; for no human intelligence could do this.

Before drawing so extreme an inference, however, my reluctance to admit the supernormal will oblige me to make all possible suppositions. It must first be established that she has never opened a Sanscrit book, and such proof is not easy to get; for even if her good faith is assured she may have forgotten that one day in some public or private library she turned over the leaves of such a book. Besides, the Sanscrit phrase must not be a mere quotation, but have reference to present circumstances. The conditions necessary to scientific conviction of the transcendental nature of the phenomenon are so onerous that I doubt if they can often be found concurrent.

Similarly A., an unpoetical person who has never written any verse, composes poems showing delicate and original poetic faculty while in a mediumistic state. She thus writes several volumes of verse, dictating so rapidly as to make it difficult to follow. This is certainly very surprising; but before supposing that some external intelligence intervenes I shall make the simpler hypothesis that she has subconscious poetic faculty. Her verses, however good, do not transcend human intelligence.

I know that spiritualists and occultists will exclaim against this as they did against my learned friend, T. Flournoy. But their objections are not justified, for it lies on them to prove the intervention of extraneous intelligence; and this proof can be given only by establishing the absolute incapacity of subconscious intelligence to write the verse or to remember certain scraps of Sanscrit.

Laplace says somewhere, The rigour of proof must be proportionate to the gravity of the conclusion. Now to admit that an extra-terrene intelligence moves the brain of Helen Smith to inspire her with Sanscrit, or the brain of A. to dictate French verse, is an inference so contrary to common-sense and logic that I shall admit any hypothesis short of mathematical or physical impossibility, rather than that of an extra-terrene mind. It is reasonable to suppose that Helen Smith has retained in an impeccable memory some phrases of Sanscrit read ten years before, and that A. may subconsciously construct verses as rapidly as a professional poet.

Every normal hypothesis must be exhausted, and also the subconscious work of the mind and the resources of an infallible memory, before we can dare to affirm the intervention of another intelligence. In the course of succeeding chapters I shall give examples of this necessary rigour.

Stella, by the movements of a table, said to me in the name of "Louise/' "Give Stella the statuette that is in your drawingroom." Now I had never told Stella that I had such a statuette; but all the same, though it is extremely unlikely that I had done this, I cannot be absolutely certain that I had not. I would not dare to condemn a man to death on such a belief, and the evidence for a scientific conclusion should be as rigid as for a deathsentence. Moreover, some one may have told Stella of the fact, though it is unlikely, for I do not think she has ever spoken to anyone who knows my drawing-room; and, lastly, she may have used this phrase by chance. In fine, though all these hypotheses are unlikely, there is one still more unlikely — that an extraneous intelligence revealed to her the existence of the statuette in my drawing-room.1

The demand for rigorous evidence must, of course, not be pushed to absurdity. To resume the case of Helen Smith; if she, being a woman still young, has not frequented libraries nor ever been in the East, were to maintain a long conversation in Sanscrit instead of mangling a few incoherent Sanscrit words as she does; if she were to grasp the grammatical intricacies of this complex language; if, in other words, she knew Sanscrit

lIt is true that when cryptesthesia has been established by great numbers of incontestable proofs it will be possible to accept as fact much that cannot be so received as yet; but this demonstration has to be made. Hence the need to eliminate pitilessly everything that is not unquestionable as a matter of demonstration. Later on it may be possible to be less exacting.

without having learned it, the hypothesis of subconscious memory would be untenable. It is certain that she has never studied Sanscrit; if, then, she were to speak it well, I do not see how, even if an unconscious and impeccable1 memory and complex subconscious working be admitted, a complete language known and spoken could be elaborated from a few data of the subconscious memory. Such a development would be a metapsychic phenomenon.

On my asking Stella for the name of one of the women who tended my infancy, she replied, "Melanie." I was not thinking of Melanie, and I am most positively sure that this name, which disappeared out of my life fifty years ago, and which I have not thought of for those fifty years, has never been uttered by me. In this case I am obliged to infer a metapsychic phenomenon, for neither pantomnesia nor subconscious mentation working up old remembrances can account for this name emerging. I put chance on one side.

It will then be no matter for astonishment if we refuse to admit, as metapsychic, various phenomena that present a metapsychic aspect to credulous persons.2 By the joint action of pantomnesia and the subconscious working of the mind some persons can produce poetical, fanciful, or scientific work of a complex and very wonderful nature, but which ought not to surprise us more than if they were consciously produced.

Stella in her normal state never composes poetry, but in her mediumistic state dictates, through the table, verses, sometimes of high merit, on a subject given to her and in a prescribed number of words. But I may say, without vanity, that I myself, simultaneously, by a kind of collaboration with Petrarch, who (according to the table) was speaking through Stella, was able to compose four lines on a given subject in a required number of words; and this poetry to order was neither better nor worse than that of "Petrarch." I prefer to suppose that Stella composed unconsciously what I was able to compose consciously;

1The word "impeccable" is unsatisfactory. I propose pantomnesia to indicate that no vestige of our intellectual past is entirely effaced. Probably we are all pantomnesic. In weighing metapsychic facts it should be taken for granted that we do not absolutely forget anything that has once impressed our senses.

1 repeat here that I keep to the definition: a metapsychic phenomenon presupposes the intervention either of an extraneous power, or of an unknown faculty of the human mind.

at any rate, that is much simpler than to suppose the intervention of Petrarch.

I shall quote, further on, the beautiful verse that Victor Hugo addressed to the shades of Moliere. "Moliere's" answer is very fine, too, but quite in Victor Hugo's style; but even if the style were Moliere's, it is more rational to think that the medium by unconscious and skilful mimicry composed and dictated verses after Moliere's manner, than to suppose the actual intervention of Moliere. In a mediumistic state Victorien Sardou drew a curious and well-known design entitled The House of Mozart. Nothing could be more strange, but I shall always feel it simpler to admit that the genius of Sardou did the subconscious work than to imagine that the soul of Mozart moved Sardou's muscles.

Every case must be carefully scrutinized before it is admitted as genuinely metapsychic; but the delicate and difficult process of analyzing such cases will lead us, as I shall show hereafter, to the conclusion that there is a small number of subjective intellectual facts (much less numerous than spiritualists suppose), which neither pantomnesia nor the subconscious elaboration of remembrances can account for.

Nevertheless, even the facts inexplicable by pantomnesia do not necessarily imply the presence of an external intelligence; for yet another hypothesis is possible — that human intelligence has a greater range than that we are accustomed to attribute to it. The axiom Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius in sensu is itself a hypothesis. Some philosophers have added "nisi intellects ipse," and the addition is justifiable, for perhaps the intellect is much deeper than we imagine.

Moreover, we are not dealing with pure intelligence, but with sensations perceived by the intelligence. There may be other senses than the five known to us. Some animals, pigeons for instance, have a sense of direction that escapes our analysis. Why should there be no cognitive faculties other than our senses? We think that the magnet, though it acts upon iron, does not act on our nervous centres; but if it were discovered that it does, I for one should not be greatly surprised. Wireless telegraphy has shown us that messages can be transmitted through space; it is therefore possible that by an analogous but invisible mechanism to which our instruments and our senses are insensitive, the brain may be affected without our being able to perceive anything either of the transmitter or the receiver. It is our ignorance that confines all possible knowledge of the external world to our five senses.

Accordingly, before inferring the existence of extraneous intelligence, I willingly admit, as a provisional hypothesis, that there are in us cognitive faculties as yet undetermined, neither usual nor of daily occurrence, but irregular in their appearance and mysterious in their action.

That is metapsychics, and we have to decide between two hypotheses:

1. Does an external intelligence act on ours?

2. Is our intelligence endowed with a new faculty of cognition?

Subjective phenomena alone are not sufficient for a decision between these two hypotheses; it will be necessary to examine, as we shall do later, whether the aggregate evidence pointing to extra-terrene intelligence is sufficient to prove either the hypothesis that human intelligence is endowed with faculties new to us; or, that extraneous intelligences incorporate and incarnate themselves in humanity.

From the point of view of method, it is extremely important never to lose sight of Laplace's precept; and before we enter upon metapsychics, all merely psychological possibilities must be exhausted.

We learn from psychology that pantomnesia exists, and also that the subconscious, perhaps even more than the conscious, is capable of prolonged and skilful elaboration of its materials.

In fine, in order to distinguish between the psychological and the metapsychic we shall adopt the criterion: Everything that the human intelligence can do, even when it is most profound and penetrating, is psychological. Everything of ivhich such intelligence is incapable belongs to metapsychics.

If Helen Smith, without having read or heard a single word of Sanscrit, speaks it fluently and correctly, that would be metapsychic, for no human intelligence can reconstruct a language. A., thinking herself inspired by her "guide," composes verses quickly and well; this is psychological, for many persons, and perhaps A., among them, can do the same.

Stella tells me the name of an old servant of my parents fifty years ago. This is metapsychic, for she has certainly never heard me pronounce that name; and no intelligence, conscious or unconscious, could give that name without having heard it.

T. leaves his friend J. in good health. He see his friend's apparition, notes the hour, and says, "J- died at nine o'clock in the evening." This is metapsychic, for no normal psychological process could have revealed it.

Thus the work of analysis, demanding most scrupulous care, will be to examine whether the facts under consideration are explicable by known mental laws, or whether it is not necessary, as I hope to demonstrate by many instances, to suppose the existence of a special sensitiveness which I call cryptesthesia — a new faculty of cognition, called lucidity by ancient authors and telepathy by modern ones.



2. Chance and Mathematical Probability in Metapsychic Facts

In experiments on lucidity two cases arise: sometimes a combination having a probability = P, that appears spontaneously; or the same combination having the same probability, but arising on demand. The evidential value in these two cases is not the same, and serious errors arise if this distinction is not observed.

I ask Andree: "What is the name of the person who wrote me this morning the letter I have in my wallet?" She answers, "It is the name of a flower — Marguerite." Now the name is not Marguerite, but Helen. I suddenly remember having received a letter which I left at home that was signed Marguerite in large letters. I was not thinking of this letter. How is the probability to be calculated?

If I had put the question having the letter from Marguerite in my wallet, the experiment would have been conclusive and the theory of probabilities would have had free play. It would have sufficed to know that there are about fifty very usual names, and the probability of a correct answer would then have been 1: 50, about the same as for a card drawn from a pack.

But if I did not want the name Marguerite, conditions are changed. In the former case either of the two names would be correct; which reduces the probability at least to 2: 50. But it is necessary to go much further, for if another name had been given— Louise, Madeline, or Alice — might I not claim to have received yesterday a letter from Louise, one from Madeline the day before, and one from Alice three days ago? I am therefore hardly justified in saying that the experiment has been successful on a probability of 2: 50. An answer which is not a direct answer to the question put is always of low evidential value. It is much as if I were to ask a candidate at an examination, What gas combines with hydrogen to form water? and he were to answer, Chlorine combines with sodium to form sodium chloride. Although perfectly correct, I should not be satisfied with the reply.

The mathematical theory of probability does not apply unless the conditions can be most accurately stated, for the least experimental defect will very greatly change the figures obtained. On the other hand, if the experiment is unexceptionable (which, by the way, is very seldom the case) the mathematical theory of probability can be rigorously applied.

Let us suppose an experiment unexceptionable, and let us see what ratio allows us to exclude chance as an explanation.

Men of science do not allow for chances in quantitative analysis. A chemist who is seeking the atomic weight of silver gets 108.42; he will not imagine that chance had anything to do with that result. He will, however, repeat the experiment, and if he gets 108.34 he will still not accept the idea of chance, but will take the mean, 108.38, as the atomic weight of silver.

It is not immediately obvious why metapsychics should not be permitted to draw a conclusion from two experiments, since this is done in astronomy, chemistry, and physiology. Nevertheless, it is easy to understand why, in metapsychics, the possibility of chance always enters in, for no experiment can be repeated with conditions so similar that a mean can be struck as in chemistry or physiology.

If after finding 108.42 as the atomic weight of silver, the chemist were to get 22.87 on the following day, he might feel the former result due to chance; but as a matter of fact his second and third experiments will give results very near the first, so that none of a possible three— 108.42, 108.34, and 108.35 — can be put down to chance; they corroborate one another.

After Andree had given me the answer "Marguerite," I inquired for another name on the following day; she gave a wrong answer. Again on the next day, a similar failure. I must, then, take these failures into account, and I might, strictly speaking, put down the correct result to chance, while in the chemical experiment chance can have no place.

It is a terrible defect in metapsychic experiments that they can never be repeated with certainty. One is never sure that today's successes can be repeated tomorrow. A particular medium may have given a series of good results on lucidity, and a few days later before a scientific committee every attempt to repeat a single one of these experiments may be a lamentable failure.

This does not imply that we must give up experiment nor that we cannot use the mathematical theory of probability. We must begin experiment afresh. We need not imitate Don Quixote, who, having made his helmet, tested it by a heavy blow with his sword and broke it. He made another, but forebore to test it, lest it also should give way, and contented himself with it as it was.

When a successful experiment has been made, we should not fear to repeat it, whether the result be to confirm or to invalidate it; on the contrary, we should apply some fresh test.

As the number of successful experiments mounts up, the greater their value becomes. To take this instance of the names; it has been shown that the probability might be taken as 1: 50, but were actually 2: 50. Let us admit, for the reasons given above, that it might be 5: 50 or 1: 10. These odds against chance success are considerable, but not sufficient for a reliable conclusion; but if on ten successive days I obtain successful results, each having the probability of 1: 10, this amounts to odds probability of (to)10> which is moral certainty.

However, though we never get an uninterrupted series of successes, we can still use the calculus of probabilities, blending successes and failures by the classical formula for compounded probabilities:

S!

where S is the number of trials in which there have been a successes on probability p, and 0 failures on probability q. Of course S=a+/3.

The sign! indicates successive multiplication oflX2X3X....XS.

E.g., from an urn containing six balls, five black and 'one white, twelve drawings are taken, the ball drawn being replaced after each trial, p = i for the white ball, and q = % for the black.

Let us suppose that in twelve trials we get five white and seven black, that is, a = 5, and 0=7. The probability of five white on twelve trials will be

1X2X3X4X5X6X7X8X9X10X11X12

X (5)X X (7)K = about^

(1X2X3X4X5) (1X2X3X4X5X6X7)

The calculus of probabilities gives very interesting results, but it must be used with extreme caution, for the smallest experimental error vitiates the whole result.

Mere good sense, apart from all arithmetic, can lead us to conclusions. If the word Kerveguen is given by spelling over the letters of the alphabet, that being really the correct word, it is useless to work out the probabilities that chance has had no part in the matter, for the odds against the result being by ^chance is (ts)9- Cryptesthesia in this case is a moral certainty.

It should not be objected that there is no absolute certainty, since even with a probability of (^V)100 the mathematical certainty would not be absolute. In fact the moral certainty is much the same with (^V)9 or (^V)100, and would still be much the same with (2V)3 for no one has had a chance success with any single experiment when the real probability was only l5*m-

It is much more important to exact the utmost scientific rigour in the experiment itself.

To show how fallacious the calculation of probabilities may be when the experiment is defective, I may instance the case of the Misses Creery who presented a long series of results in mental transmission whose probability was only iootooo.ooo.ooo.ooo-

A few zeros more or less matter but little; what is important is that the experiments should be faultless. Now, the Creery girls admitted in the end that their answers were sometimes tricky, so that the figures proved nothing whatever.

Even without any intentional trickery there may be some error in the experiments, very slight perhaps, but enough to vitiate all calculations of probability. In dealing cards, for instance, the subconscious attention of the percipient, which is always awake, may very well note certain minute points, unperceived by most people, that would enable him to recognize some particular cards. And who can say when the experimenter has seen a card and called for it to be guessed, whether his facial expression may not, in despite of himself, give a sharp-sighted medium some clue which can consciously or unconsciously be made use of?

At roulette all the niches are exactly equal, but if there is one a little larger than others, even the tenth of a millimeter, this imperceptible difference makes the calculus of probabilities inapplicable. On 360 trials, for instance, the number that is a little wider than others will come up twenty times instead of sixteen, as it should.

The calculus of probabilities should be applied only when the experiments are unexceptionable.

There is another reason for caution; some facts do not admit of calculation. Mrs. Green sees two young girls drowning, their hats floating on the water. At that moment two girls, one of them a niece that Mrs. Green had never seen, were drowned in Australia and their hats were seen floating on the water some hours after. The improbability could not possibly be put into figures.

When Stella is asked the first name of G.'s son, and answers "Jean," the probability may be considered comparatively easy to calculate. Is it? Am I to take all possible masculine names? There are about two hundred, about one hundred that are common, and perhaps thirty very common. According to the data chosen the probability will be 1: 200, or 1: 100 or 1: 30. Moreover, I must presume that there was not the slightest gesture of a stop at the letter J by the person running over the alphabet.

In fine, we may use the calculus of probabilities; but with caution, for it facilitates over-bold statements.

Further, it is a curious fact that calculation of probabilities seldom produces definite conviction; by a kind of half-justified instinct people refuse to admit inferences that are not evident at first sight.



3. Concerning Errors of Observation

The calculus of probabilities is very easy of application, and any schoolboy could solve the elementary problems in arithmetic that arise from its application to metapsychic matters; but the experimental precautions and the alert and sustained attention that go to an unexceptionable experiment are as complex as the actual calculation is simple.

I will here endeavour to give some cautions, for rigorous experimental conditions are of the very first importance. To avoid illusions is the crux of subjective metapsychics.

1. Mistakes of memory. Memory, whether one's own or that of others, is unreliable. In observing subjective phenomena very few persons will deliberately falsify; but very many give distorted accounts of what they have seen and heard; they modify and alter phrases, details, dates, and hours, and change words, all quite involuntarily. We are all liable to this; and in such matter I trust no one, not even myself. When firmly convinced of the hypothesis of lucidity, a witness will relate some telling fact, passing lightly over contradictory details and omitting awkward ones, while insisting overmuch on those that support his theory. One little word is passed over in silence, another is added, and these may fundamentally change the conclusion to be drawn.

By repeated telling, a story becomes quite unconsciously distorted and gives rise to inferences that are wonderful indeed, but fallacious.

No accounts can be relied on unless written down immediately after the event to which they refer. If after several repetitions we compare the verbal account with that written down at the time, it will often be found that the cumulative effect of successive mental changes has made the story very different from the record. We should constantly remind ourselves that memory is very treacherous. No observer soever can dispense with writing down all the details of an experiment immediately it is finished.

And full details are never put down; it is important to describe the smallest circumstances; notes must never be scanty. In contrast to published work, notes should be prolix to the point of being wearisome. A profusion of detail in notes written for one's own use is never a mistake. Everything should be noted, one always tends to be too concise. It is well that when several persons have taken part in an experiment that all should write records. During my experiments with Eusapia in conjunction with Ochorowicz I dictated notes throughout the experiments, to a secretary placed in a corner of the room, so that all the circumstances of every phenomenon should be described without alterations of any kind. It is to be regretted that this cannot always be done.

For these reasons records made long after the event or dealing with ancient observations never written down at all, can never have any but a very qualified value.

The best evidence is the conclusion of a good observer on the facts, drawn at the time. The opinion formed during the experiment while all subsidiary facts exercised their influence on his mind will carry much more weight than any account given ten or twenty years after. During the continuance of an experiment a rapid synthesis is made of all the surrounding conditions so that we reach a personal conviction, more intuitive than definitely reasoned out indeed, but very valid. Many details may escape our memory, but the remembrance of the conviction produced remains.

For my own part I give great weight to the conviction so produced (which should be written down immediately after the experiment in the notes taken), for we find ourselves led (often wrongly) by defective memory to modify first impressions either in the direction of credulity or of scepticism, both of which are equally regrettable.

To conclude: much error is due to scanty records and to lapses of memory.

2. In the course of an experiment attention must be paid to all the circumstances, even to those which seem irrelevant. In dealing with subjective metapsychics, every word, every gesture should be well considered. The slightest play of feature, a sigh or a smile, an interjection, a slight movement of the hand, any sign, however unnoticeable, of satisfaction, impatience, surprise, or disappointment may possibly put the medium on the track and no slightest indications of the kind should be made.

All this is very difficult, and long practice is needed to reach absolute impassiveness. I am inclined to think that the reason why telepathic experiments seem to succeed more often than those of simple lucidity is, that as in the former the answer is known beforehand, the medium is helped by involuntary trifles, while in the latter case no such assistance can be given. One does not correct one's own trifling mistakes and signs of dissatisfaction. Unfortunately it seldom happens, when we know the word that ought to be given, that we are so sel f-cont rolled; we are often so unskilful as to allow it to be seen whether the answer begins well or ill.

Especially with table experiments extreme precaution is required. Of course, the movements of the table are usually due to the medium only, but if any other hands are upon it the assistants may mechanically affect its jerks or levitations. The slightest pressure is enough to reveal the thoughts of those who have their hands on the table; and it must be repeated that mediums, whether consciously or unconsciously, have their attention on the stretch; they are on the look-out for anything that may reveal the word, the phrase, or the idea that is sought for. Nothing escapes them, and the slightest pressure on the table becomes a sign that they know how to interpret. This perspicacity has nothing to do with fraud, for their interpretations, deductions, observations, and conclusions are all subconscious; but the effect in falsifying results is the same as if there were conscious fraud.

Therefore, in order to make any serious experiment on lucidity, it is inadmissible that any person who knows the answer to be given should touch the movable object through which that answer is to come. I have often been surprised by the astounding credulity of some persons who exclaim at the wonderful answers given through the table. Oh, yes, no doubt the answers were correct but no way astonishing, since the questioner himself furnished them! Many experiments in subjective metapsychics are thus vitiated for want of the precautions necessary to deprive the medium of all help from the face, the gestures, and the words of the person who knows the answer.

Exquisite tact is needed if we are not to be misled by appearances. Good experiments in subjective metapsychics are very difficult indeed; they can only be made by distrusting everything and everybody, one's self included. A desire that the experiment should be successful must never lead us to deceive ourselves.

3. Fraud is as rare in subjective phenomena as it is common in the objective; for I take it for granted that no one will experiment with persons known to be tricksters. In most cases the good faith of medium and assistants is above reproach.

But belief in the good faith of the operators should in no way reduce the precautions to be taken. The experimenter should act as if the medium were persistently fraudulent; for if conscious good faith is the rule, unconscious bad faith is the rule also; every medium makes desperate efforts by an unwearied subconscious mind to find the answer required and uses all possible means to discover it.

For instance, I ask for the name of Marguerite's brother. Now it is possible that the medium has at some time or other heard that Marguerite has a brother who is one of my friends. Then her brain will work to find out who among my friends (whose first names she, perhaps, knows) — Henry, Louis, Charles, Gustave, Paul, Lucien, Gaston, Robert — may be Marguerite's brother. By means of some details subconsciously retained she knows that Louis, Henry, and Charles have no sister. Five names only then remain, and then if during the interrogation through the table all the letters of the alphabet are passed over up to R without a word or a sign, only the name Robert will remain; she will say "Robert"; and if I am not exacting I shall find this reply very satisfactory.

Therefore, that lucidity may be really established there must be an absolute impossibility, I say "Absolute," of the utmost perspicacity putting the medium on the track.

Only at this price can observations be taken as conclusive. When we are dealing with objective metapsychics the dispositions to be made to guard against possible bad faith will be equally severe, but obviously of a different kind.



Chapter II. On Cryptesthesia (Lucidity) in General



1. Definition and Classification

Nearly the whole of subjective metapsychics can be reduced to a single phenomenon which the magnetizers of a past age called "lucidity" or "clairvoyance" (hellsehen); which is now called telepathy, with various shades of meaning attached to the term. I propose to name it cryptesthesia. Myers has already used the term "telesthesia."

The Greek etymology of the word signifies "a hidden sensibility"— a perception of things by a mechanism unknown to us of which we are cognizant only by its effects.

I shall endeavour to prove that human intelligence includes a special and mysterious faculty which reveals certain facts, past, present, or future, that the senses are unable to supply.

That Stella is able to state the name of an old servant Melanie which she has never seen or heard, indicates (unless this be by chance) that some vibration has reached her intelligence and revealed this name to her. Therefore she possesses some cryptic sensibility which acquaints her with what her normal senses could not have told her. We do not know how or by what means this happens, and shall endeavour to discover the method; but even though we do not succeed, the bare fact is unquestionably real. There is cryptesthesia.

The major part of this book is devoted to proving the existence of this faculty; but before proceeding to the many and diverse facts which constitute the history of cryptesthesia, two essential points must be examined:

1. The relation of cryptesthesia to lucidity and telepathy.

2. The psychic phenomena that take the form of metapsychic phenomena and might pass for such if superficially and imperfectly analyzed.



2. Connection of Cryptesthesia with Lucidity and Telepathy

Mesmer, Puysegur, and Du Potet verified a power that enabled the subjects of their experiments to see objects in a closed box, to read in closed books, to travel to and describe places unknown to them, and to guess the thoughts of the magnetizer and his assistants.

Later on, Myers invented the happy term "telepathy," which has been extensively adopted to signify that human thought can act upon another person without any apparent external vibration.

But synergetic vibrations in two brains is a hypothesis that must be examined somewhat closely, for many ideas on telepathy are current which I believe to be erroneous.

People readily imagine that to refer a fact to telepathy is to explain it. The magic of words leads them to think of telepathy as a simple thing.

When, as previously mentioned, Andree tells me, "You have received a letter signed by a woman who is named after a flower, Marguerite/' it is always suggested that I was thinking of Marguerite and that Andree has read my thought.

Two hypotheses then present themselves, setting aside chance and mal-observation; either that Andree said "Marguerite" because the name was in my thoughts or that by a special faculty of lucidity she has read the name on the letter in my room a mile and a half distant.

From the scientific point of view it is equally impossible to understand how this name could be known, whether by the unconscious remembrance in my brain of a letter received that morning or by the fact of its being written at the foot of that letter.

The problem is equally mysterious whether I have or have not read the letter. Although the pole-star is many millions of miles beyond Sirius, both are equally inaccessible. To read my thought seems as difficult as to read a letter (open or closed) on my desk two miles or two thousand miles distant.

It seems to me slightly less difficult to admit reading a signature at a distance than to admit reading a word in my brain; for, as we are dealing with the inexplicable, it is slightly easier to imagine that piercing vision should traverse the intervening distance and penetrate walls and papers than that the percipient should be able to interpret the verbal sense carried by the modes of vibration of cerebral cells in my skull. Both being hypotheses, I prefer to imagine an amazing retinal vision of written words than a reading of my brain wherein nothing is written, but in

which there are so many impressions, memories, and exceedingly complex and evanescent combinations that are really ultramicroscopic modifications of cellular protoplasm, none of which have any relation, apart from my own consciousness, to the sound or to the phonetic signs of the name. To say "telepathy" explains nothing. Cerebral vibration, conscious or unconscious, is a profound mystery, much greater than a signature, which is positive, real, and tangible, and would be visible to sight if sufficiently penetrating; whereas the reading of a thought cannot be explained by any intensification of any of our senses.

There are many reasons, none very sound, why the telepathic hypothesis should be so favourably received by unscientific (or even by scientific) persons as if it were so simple that there should be no need to press it further.

1. The first is that it agrees perfectly with the shortcomings in experiment. It is obvious that if I do not know the word "Marguerite" in an unopened letter I can in no way assist Andree to say the word. But if I do know it and am not very careful, if Andree hesitates, seeks, and guesses, I may very naively furnish indications that she will not fail to use. I may be putting her straight and becoming an unconscious accomplice. There will not be the absolute inertia that must prevail if I do not know the word. Having made very many experiments, I know only too well how difficult it is to give no sign whatever of approval or disapproval when one knows the word the medium has to discover.

2. An equally bad reason is that spectacular exhibitions of socalled thought-reading are given to the public. The skill shown at these exhibitions is sometimes marvellous. A young woman, A., with bandaged eyes, is seated facing the audience. Her magnetizer, B., stands at her side, and calls for one of the audience, C, who is certainly not an accomplice. C. shows his visiting card without speaking; B. looks at it, and almost immediately A. spells out the card, sometimes with hesitation, sometimes very quickly, without delay or mistake, even when the words are unusual.

The experiment is an amusing one, but proves nothing except the extraordinary skill of the operators. It is practically certain that there is a code of signs, words, attitudes, movements of the right or left hand or foot, of the body or the head that allow A., whose eyes are more or less completely bandaged, to perceive signs that the public do not notice, and enable her, thanks to an excellent memory, to state the numbers or words that B. transmits. It is no more thought-reading than when a Morse telegraph operator gets the sense of a message from the ticking of the instrument.

Generally these exhibitions are so quick and so skilful as to satisfy a public that loves to be deceived; people leave with an unreasoned conviction that they have seen "thought-reading," and thenceforward when they have uttered the words "thought-reading," "mental suggestion," or "telepathy," they fancy that they have understood the whole thing and do not imagine that they are speaking of one of the most terrifying mysteries of human existence.

3. Another form of pseudo-thought-reading is also spectacular. An individual, A., sensitive, or claiming to be sensitive, but certainly very sharp, declares he will read the thought of anyone who will hold him by the hand. He brings on the scene B., taken from the audience. The unfortunate B., shy at his position, hesitates, takes A.'s hand, and A. makes him walk by his side quickly or slowly, and by skilful guesses reaches the place that B. thought of. He stops before some member of the audience, searches in his pocket, and, still holding B.'s hand, withdraws a handkerchief which he takes to some other point in the hall. All this to the amazement of the audience and especially of B., who has willed the whole performance, and imagines that A. has read his thought. In fact A. has merely interpreted skilfully the unconscious and involuntary muscular movements of poor B., who does not know that he has by such movements given very clear indications; and the public leave the hall more than ever convinced of telepathy. In this way belief in telepathy as an obvious and simple fact becomes firmly fixed in the popular mind; though in all this there is no more telepathy than in the contraction of a frog's muscle by the electric battery.1

It is doubtless for such reasons that telepathy is accepted more

1There is a whole bibliography on unconscious movements. I cannot give even a resume of it here. It is the willing game, otherwise called Cumberlandism, from Cumberland, who first gave these exhibitions. Grasset explains it by his "polygon," which is simply an ingenious diagram of the subconscious.

readily than lucidity. The two are, however, not opposed; both are probably true and real telepathy should be considered as a particular and common mode of lucidity. It may be remarked that nearly, if not quite always, when a percipient is asked a question the answer is known to the questioner. When it is unknown it is almost certainly known to someone else, and the telepathic theory might be pushed so far as to say, "If the percipient has read 'Marguerite' in a letter that B. has not opened, she could certainly not read in B.'s mind a word it did not contain; but there is another person — Marguerite herself — whose thought has been read, and not the word written in the letter."

Some go even further. As there are facts known to no living person, but known to B., now dead, this can still be explained by telepathy — the thought of B., deceased, has been transmitted to the percipient.

These wire-drawn explanations show amply that we know absolutely nothing of the means whereby cryptesthetic cognitions reach the mind.

The question whether there is telepathy (transmission of human thought) or lucidity (cognizance of an external fact) is specially applicable to the very frequent cases of monitions at the moment of death.

I will take an instance that might have been invented for illustration, though it is real. A. sees in his sleep on a certain night the apparition of his friend B., pale as a corpse. A. writes down the name in his diary, adding "God forbid." At that very moment B. was killed while out hunting on the other side of the world.

Again the same two hypotheses arise: Did A. perceive an external event, or did the dying thought of B. traverse the intervening space and impress A.?

I do not venture to decide between these hypotheses, both of which seem to me equally mysterious, but I infer a faculty of cognition outside the order of normal faculties. I think it best to keep within the limits of rigid science, and to say — At certain times the mind can take cognizance of realities which neither our senses, our insight, nor our reasoning permit of our knowing. This is not an explanation, but it leaves the door open to any future explanation. Human thought is one among the realities thus made known, but this is not a necessary condition; the reality alone is sufficient, without its having passed through a human mind.

Let us go no further, and in presence of these unusual facts let us be content to say that our mental mechanism, even more complex than it seems, has means of cognizance that escape analysis and are even beyond surmise. This dispenses with all hypothesis; it does not imply that cryptesthetic knowledge arises from transmitted vibrations of human thought; it merely states a fact, and it is more scientific to enunciate a fact without comment than to enmesh one's self in theories, such as telepathy, which are entirely unproven.

"Telepathy" implies a hypothesis; "cryptesthesia" has the great merit that it does not. If A. sees his dying friend at the moment of death it is a hypothesis to say that the thought of B. has been transmitted to A. But it is no hypothesis to say that A. has some special sensibility that makes him aware of the death of B. Telepathy is not contradictory of cryptesthesia. As "thoughttransference" it comes into play in certain cases, but is quite insufficient in others. In such obscure matters superfluous hypotheses should be avoided as far as possible.

As there are few, if any, facts known to no human person soever, all phenomena of lucidity, with scarcely any exceptions, might be referred to telepathy. Theoretically, distance, whether two yards or two thousand miles, does not come into the question. But it is vastly improbable that when Mrs. Green, in London, sees a niece whom she does not know, drowning in Australia, the thoughts of that niece should have sought out her aunt. Is it not much simpler to admit, without making any hypothesis, that Mrs. Green possesses a special sensitiveness?

Therefore, when in this book telepathy is spoken of, as it often will be, it must be understood as a particular form of lucidity and not as a distinct phenomenon. Both are equally mysterious.1



3. Phenomena of Normal Psychology Having Only the Semblance of Cryptesthesia

The necessity of not introducing facts explicable by normal psychology into metapsychics has already been insisted upon.

It is noteworthy that in nearly all experiments mediums refer the thoughts transmitted through a table, by planchette, or by

ll have just received the April (1921) number of the Proc. S. P. R., containing an excellent article by Mrs. H. Sidgwick (pp. 242-398), An Examination of Book-tests. She reaches a similar conclusion. I regret that I cannot here analyze this valuable notice.

writing, to personalities other than themselves. This is the case even when they have but a very slight acquaintance with spiritualist literature, or even at the commencement of their mediumship none at all. It has seemed advisable to me, as to all who have conducted such experiments, to admit their suppositions in order to facilitate success. This does not imply a belief in the reality of such notions; it is only a working hypothesis, as Claude Bernard said.

"Personification" characterizes nearly all spiritist experiments. I borrow this word from J. Maxwell, who uses it to describe the tendency of mediums to attribute their answers to separate personalities. These are often multiple, but there is usually one that takes precedence, and excludes others. This personality in spiritualist parlance is called a "guide" or "control." The remarkable object phenomena presented by Eusapia were referred by her to John King. Similarly Mrs. Piper's subjective phenomena were attributed by her to Phinuit. These personifications are sufficiently explained by the unconscious, which, like an unknown guest, has emotions, ideas, remembrances, will, and feelings quite beyond our consciousness. A study of the psychology that deals with duplication of personality will show how far this subconscious personality is real or imaginary.

Physicians have observed that in some rare cases the whole mentality of the patient A. is changed. He takes another name, B., loses remembrance of his former life, and builds up a new set of associations in B.'s name. A. and B. then seem to be two separate persons, with differing tastes, feelings, and acts. Since the well-known case of Azam, Dr. Prince has collected some remarkable instances in America.

Magnetizers have declared, vaguely, that they could, by verbal suggestion, transform a patient in this manner while in the hypnotic state; but they seem never to have realized the bearings of this experiment, and everything about it was doubtful. I made a study of these alternations of personality in 1887, and since then they have taken rank among the admitted phenomena of hypnotism.

This singular fact may be thus described: I tell Alice, a young girl in the hypnotic state, "You are no longer Alice, you are an old woman." It matters little whether or not I have made any passes, verbal suggestion is sufficient. At once Alice takes on the cough, the gestures, and the weak voice of an old woman, and for an hour or two, if the patience of the observers is not wearied, she acts in all respects like an old woman. It is acting, but involuntary acting proceeding from a docile mind under hypnotic suggestion. Nothing can be more extraordinary and indeed amusing than this complete adaptation to the new personality.

The question of simulation does not arise. It is universally recognized that there is no simulation; and it matters little to know whether there is or is not any faint remembrance at the base of her consciousness that she is Alice. What is obvious and certain is that she assumes the character assigned to her without the ability to throw it off. That there remains some residue of her real personality is more than possible, it must be so; but her personality instantly adapts itself to the suggested personality with a vigour and perfection not to be rivalled by the most accomplished actress. The conformity to the new personality is so complete that even the handwriting changes its character.

Any character can be imposed at will; she becomes a general, a little boy, a pastry cook, a fine lady, or a market-woman, and we get whatever comedy we may desire.

The experiment may be pushed still further. Some subjects will take on animal similitudes. I hypnotize my excellent friend H. Ferrari and tell him that he is a parrot. I ask him, "Why do you look preoccupied?" and he replies, "How can I eat the seed in my cage?" The words "my cage" are typical and indicate the extent of the transformation.

I wish to make it clear that there is no reason for surprise if spiritist messages seem to come from a real person. The human mind is very prone to create a personality. The phenomenon is the same whether it proceeds from external suggestion, from some exterior event, or from auto-suggestion. It is not metapsychic, but pertains to normal psychology; and when subconscious actions take place they group themselves round the personality that has been created.

I compare this to crystallization from a saturated solution — the crystals form round a centre. Similarly remembrances and emotions concentrate upon the personality invented.

These spiritoid personalities manifest themselves chiefly in automatic writing or table movements, and (more rarely) by raps. Sometimes they borrow the voice of the medium. The conviction is so thorough, the representation so perfect, and the unconsciousness so complete that the experimenters are won over and cannot suppose that all these psychological phenomena proceed from an imaginary being.

A woman takes a pencil and writes pages upon pages without knowing or understanding what she writes in feverish haste; her handwriting is quite different from the normal; she writes and writes for ten minutes, for half an hour, or even longer. When one sheet is finished she takes another and instantly covers it. All this while she knows nothing of what she is doing, and she can at the same time keep up a quite sensible conversation with those round her. Everything happens just as if her own personality were replaced by another that borrows her hand.

In all good faith she says, "It is not I who write," and in all good faith those who see her agree that it is so. If only the writing should be similar from day to day, moderately coherent in style and ideas, if the imitation of the manner of some deceased person is fairly good, all are convinced that a spirit has intervened and made his wishes known.

But it is no more possible to admit this than when I say to Alice, "You are now an old general"; and she speaks like an old soldier. Whether there are or are not any traces of the normal personality remaining, in no case at all can the reality of an external personality be admitted.1

This is as true of mediums as of somnambulists, only in the latter it is produced by external suggestion, and in the former it is entirely due to auto-suggestion. But in both cases the new personality is arbitrary and factitious, and has no more external reality than poetic creations — than Esmeralda, Carmen, Figaro, or Don Juan.2

I will now give some examples of these automatic writings if only to show the high improbability that they proceed from spirits.

1The best instance of these alterations of personality is perhaps that of Helen Smith becoming Marie Antoinette, of which Flournoy made a profound study.

aMme. Noggerath, a kindly woman who lived to a great age and died some years since, held many seances with different mediums, and devoted her whole life to propagation of spiritualist doctrines which she most profoundly believed. She published in a book, La Survie, sa realite, sa manifestation, sa philosophic. Echos de VAu-dcla, Paris, Flammarion, 1897, the messages claiming to be from the spirits of the dead. Pythagoras, Socrates, Buddha, Fenelon, Bossuet, Moliere, Abelard, Moses, St. John, Robespierre, Cuvier, Diderot, all appear. This list should by itself be enough to show the nullity of this belief.

You neglect me, and forget me in the petty cares of your world. You keep me waiting when I beg for a family reunion. You make a vacuum for me, as it were; I cannot enter on an unknown void.

— MOLIEKE.

0 Venice, of whom so many poets have sung. Venice, flower-like, what remains of her glory and her gorgeous palaces? The glory of Venice is no more; the vices of her proud rulers have killed her. Where are now the sublime teachings of Jesus? All has vanished. The cross has cast a deadly shadow, deadly because phantoms intercepted its rays.

— Pythagoras.

Life on earth (la vie planet aire) enables the resolutions taken in the wandering state — that is, in sidereal life— to be reduced to practice. In the latter state, there being no bodily needs to force the spirit into action,

life can only be contemplative. T T

—J. J. Rousseau.

What melancholy times! What sad days! How veiled is my soul! How have I fallen so low? Why can I not forget? Why do rays of light fall on me, followed by utter darkness? — the vague remembrance of a past that I feel to be cruel, but cannot re-awaken! Oh, the cries of terror, the flowing, steaming blood! _ _

— FOUQUIER-TlNVILLE.

No doubt the words about steaming blood aroused the memory of Mile, de Sombreuil in the medium's mind, for immediately after Fouquier-Tinville Mile, de Sombreuil comes on the scene and says some astounding things:

1 love Fouquier-Tinville. I loved him from the moment he saved my

life. I recognized his beauty and his own kind of greatness. Yes, I love

him! I suffer when people praise my virtue and call him whom I love a

monster; O Love, Love! _

— Mlle. de Sombreuil.

Let us put aside these divagations; they would only be matter for laughter if it were not for the melancholy fact that they have been accepted as genuine by honourable men. In fact they are but manifestations of the subconsciousness of the mediums, which is often below mediocrity.

There are exceptions to this poverty of language in spiritist communications. M. Carmelo Samona having asked a spirit why nothing of the beyond was divulged, received by raps the following really fine symbolism: Non mangerai pane il cui seme non abbia dormito prima nello nuda terra, la cui bionda spiga non si sia curvata al soffio del vento, e non sia caduta poi sotti Tinexorabile falca del mietitore (Psiche misteriosa, Palermo, 1910, p. 64).

In a few minutes, Laura speaking to Petrarch through Stella, who in her normal state is not poetic, says:

Si j'etais l'air que tu respires, Ami, comme je serais doux! J'effeuillerais sur ton sourire, Des baisers exquisement fous!

Among the most remarkable exceptions are the verses dictated to Victor Hugo, who believed in spiritualism.1

Jules Bois gives, in Le Mirage Moderne (Paris, Ollendorff, 1907) some interesting details on Victor Hugo's spiritualism. He was converted by Mme. Emile de Girardin in Jersey, September 6, 1853. At the first seance Vacquerie asked, What word am I thinking of? The table answered, You mean "suffering." The word in Vacquerie's mind was "Love." The answer was ingenious and unexpected. In later seances Victor Hugo was not at the table: Charles Hugo was the medium. He knew no English. An Englishman came in and called Lord Byron, who replied in English:

Vex not the bard, his lyre is broken, His last song sung, his last word spoken.

Strange apocalyptic answers are attributed to Ezekiel, and — to the lion of Androcles! On the margin of the MS. Victor Hugo writes the stupefying words, "The volumes dictated to my son Charles by the table contain an answer from the lion of Androcles."

Each verse given is good in itself, but the development of the poem is incoherent: "^Eschylus" expresses himself thus:

Non, 1'homme ne sera jamais libre sur terre: Cest le triste captif du bien, du mal, du beau, II ne peut devenir — c'est la loi du mystere — Libre qu'en devenant prisonnier du tombeau.

Fatalite, lion dont Tame est devoree, J'ai voulu te dompter d'un bras cyclopeen, J'ai voulu sur mon dos porter ta peau tigree, II me plaisait qu'on dit: "Eschyle nemeen."

a"The moving or speaking table has been much ridiculed. Let us speak out. This ridicule is pointless. It is easier to mock than to examine, but it is not scientific.... Science knows very little and has no right to dream. A scientist who ridicules possibilities is near to being a fool. The unexpected should always be looked for in science." — {Shakespeare by Victor Hugo, Lacroix, Paris, 1864.)

Je n'ai pas reussi: la bete f auve humaine Dechire encor nos chairs de son ongle eternel. Le cceur de l'homme est plein encor de cris de haine, Cette fosse aux lions n'a pas de Daniel.

Apres moi vint Shakspeare, il vit les trois sorcieres, O Nemee, arriver du fond de la foret, Et jeter dans nos cceur s ses troublantes chaudieres, Les philtres monstrueux de rimmense secret.

II vint dans ce grand bois, la limite du monde; Apres moi, le dompteur, il vint, lui, le chasseur. Et, comme il regardait dans son ame profonde, Macbeth cria: "Fuyons," et Hamlet dit: "J'ai peur."

II se sauva. Moilere, alors sur la lisiere, Parut, et dit: "Voyez si mon ame faiblit. Commandeur, viens souper." Mais au festin de Pierre Moliere trembla tant que Don Juan palit.

Mais que ce soit le spectre, ou la sorciere, ou l'ombre, C'est toujours toi, lion, et ta griffe de fer. Tu remplis tellement la grande foret sombre, Que Dante te rencontre en entrant dans l'enfer.

Tu n'es dompte qu'a l'heure ou la mort, belluaire, T'arrache de la dent Tame humaine en lambeau, Te prend, dans la foret profonde et seculaire, Et te montre du doigt ta cage, le tombeau.

Sometimes Victor Hugo interrogated the spirits, of course in admirable poetry. One day he addressed Moliere:

Les rois, et vous, la-haut, changez-vous d'enveloppe? Louis quatorze au ciel n'est-il pas ton valet? Francois premier est-il le fou de Triboulet? Et Cresus, le laquais d'Esope?

But Moliere did not reply: the answer came from the Shadow of the Tomb.

Le Ciel ne punit pas par de telles grimaces, Et ne travestit pas en fou Francois premier, L'enfer n'est pas un bal de grotesques paillasses, Dont le noir chatiment serait le costumier.

Dissatisfied with the response, Hugo repeats his invocation to Moliere:

Toi qui du vieux Shakspeare as ramasse le ceste, Toi qui pres d'Othello sculptas le sombre Alceste, Astre qui resplendis sur un double horizon, Poete au Louvre, archange au ciel, 6 grand Moliere 1 Ta visite splendide honore ma maison.

Me tendras-tu la haut ta main hospitaliere? Que la fosse pour moi s'ouvre dans le gazon. Je vois sans peur la tombe aux ombres eternelles; Car je sais que le corps y trouve une prison, Mais que Tame y trouve des ailes.

The Shadow of the Tomb (probably annoyed), answers:

Esprit qui veux savoir le secret des tenebres, Et qui, tenant en main le celeste flambeau, Viens, furtif, a tatons, dans nos ombres funebres, Crocheter l'immense tombeau!

Rentre dans ton silence, et souffle tes chandelles, Rentre dans cette nuit dont quelquefois tu sors, L'ceil humain ne voit pas les choses eternelles, Par dessus l'epaule des morts.

Fine verses, but not due to Moliere or to ^Eschylus, any more than to the lion of Androcles.

In the first seances given by Helen Smith, Victor Hugo is supposed to be the inspiring influence; and as interpreted by Helen Smith, his poetic faculty has strangely gone off:

L'amour, divine essence, insondale mystere, Ne le repousse point. C'est le ciel sur la terre. L'amour, la charite seront ta vie entiere; Jouis et fais jouir; mais n'en sois jamais fiere.

(Flournoy, loc. cit.)

The lion of Androcles was a better poet than Helen Smith's Victor Hugo.

The Shadow of the Tomb spoke in prose as finely as in verse. As Victor Hugo complained of the use of symbolical expressions, the Shadow replied:

"O ill-advised! You say the Shadow of the Tomb speaks in human language, and uses biblical figures and words, metaphors, and falsehood to express truth. The Shadow of the Tomb is not a mask, I am a reality. If I condescend to speak your jargon in which the sublime is so tempestuous, it is because you are limited. Words are a fetter to the spirit; symbols are the casket of thought; your ideals are restraints on the soul; the sublime to you is a low blind-alley; your sky is the roof of a cave; your language is a noise bound up between the covers of a dictionary. My language is immensity, the ocean, the tempest. My library is of thousands of stars and millions of planets and constellations. If you desire that I should speak to you in my own tongue, ascend Mount Sinai, you will hear me in its lightnings; go to Calvary, you will see me in its rays; descend into the tomb, you will hear me in its mercy."

If, as seems probable, the subconscious of Charles Hugo dictated both prose and verse, that subconsciousness emulated the genius of Victor Hugo himself.

There are other interesting cases in which it is just as necessary to suppose purely human intervention.

Hermance Dufaux, a girl of fourteen, has given a Life of Jeanne D'Arc, dictated by Jeanne, and Confessions of Louis XI.1 Allan Kardec guarantees the honesty of this young girl in her claim to have written these books by inspiration without reference to historical records and documents.

Four hypotheses are possible:

1. Gross fraud, getting the needful particulars from public libraries, or from easily procurable books; just as Prosper Merimee was able to write Le Theatre dc Clara Gazul, without any spiritist implication. This seems likely; though it implies a cleverness, skill, and dishonesty of which this respectable girl was perhaps incapable (?).

2. An infallible memory, partially subconscious, so that Hermance could recall at the moment required everything that she had read and heard. Her subconscious intelligence, more able than her normal mind, classifies, condenses, and verifies all the detail she has read and heard, and attributes these to Jeanne and to Louis XI. What could we not say and write if we could thus recover all the details of all our reading! Even at fourteen years old a great deal might have been read!

Hermance Dufaux, speaking as Jeanne d'Arc, resembles Helen Smith who sincerely thinks herself Marie Antoinette or Cagliostro. I think this hypothesis almost as likely as the first, although a third might possibly be taken.

3. By cryptesthesia, Hermance, being a sensitive, knows facts, names, dates, and events that have not come to her through her normal senses. Then these metapsychic cognitions group themselves around the personality created by auto-suggestion.

Before admitting this bold hypothesis in such a case, it would be necessary to know the exact limits of Hermance's reading; which after an interval of half a century, is impossible.

4. The last hypothesis is that the consciousnesses of Louis XI and Jeanne have not disappeared from the world and write through Hermance.

lRevue Spirite, 1858, p. 73, and La Verite, May 29, 1864 (1 vol., E. Dentu, Paris. 1858).

Here we have a terribly incredible hypothesis that cannot even be considered unless the radical impossibility of the three former hypotheses has been demonstrated.

I have dealt fully with the case of Hermance Dufaux because it applies equally to all the cases of automatic writing which are presumed to identify dead persons.

Bersot (cited by Grasset, ad loc, 195) states that there was printed at Guadaloupe in 1853, Juanita, a novel, by a chair, followed by a proverb and some other ineptitudes from the same source.

The story of Charles Dickens dictating the conclusion of his novel, The Mystery of Edwin Drood, after his decease, is still more astonishing.1

In 1872 a young working shoemaker named James, who had received but little school education, found himself able to write automatically. In this way Dickens, not long dead, expressed the desire to complete the work left unfinished at his decease. James set to work, i.e., to write under the dictation of Dickens. The result is this volume, that some critics consider quite worthy of Dickens. On this I am not competent to speak, nor to appreciate the similarities in style, the use of the London dialect in place of the American idiom, and the knowledge of the topography of London; but it is well known that parodies are easy enough,

e.g., "a la Maniere de " by Muller and P. Reboux. Even

if the parody were more perfect I should not infer the intervention of Dickens. Even if James's good faith were established and the incapacity of normal intelligence to create this able parody were also proved, I should still not infer the survival of Dickens. Any supposition seems to me preferable to the naive and simple but terribly improbable hypothesis that Charles Dickens returned from the other world to move the brachial muscles of James.

