The result is correct to 2 lb. or 3 lb. The decreased weight could not be kept quite steady, there evidently being a strong tendency for the abstracted matter to fly back into the body of the medium. The operators appeared to experience much difficulty in keeping it outside on the floor, though they seemingly managed it for a period of from eight to ten seconds. Moreover, the medium became rather restless when

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION 81]

her weight greatly diminished, though tip to a decrease of 20 lb. or so she did not move a muscle.

Experiment 22: Psi/chic matter 'built up into a rapping rod.

I asked the operators to make the matter they said they abstracted in Experiment 21 into a psychic rod, exactly similar to the rod they use to cause the sledge-hammer blow. I told them to rest the free end of this rod on the floor — not to press, but simply to rest it on the floor. The operators gave three raps when this was supposed to be done.

Result:

Weight of medium -f- chair + board before test = 138^ lb.

Weight of medium + chair + board

when the three raps were given .. . = 993^ lb.

Decrease in weight of medium (correct to 2 lb. or 3 lb.) = 39 1b.

Experiment 23: Maximum weight of matter taken from medium's tody,

I asked the operators to take as much matter from the medium's body as they possibly could and to rest it on the floor. Three raps were given when this was supposed to be done.

Result:

Weight of medium + chair + board

before test = 138H lb.

Weight of medium + chair + board when

the three raps were given = 84 lb.

Decrease in weight of medium (correct to

L 2 lb. or 3 lb.) = 54^ lb.

The weight decreased in fluxes, seemingly as though the operators were pulling the matter out against the action of something resembling a spring. After about the 30 lb. mark was passed the pulls on the medium's body were evidently severe, as she became somewhat restless. Sometimes, when the maximum diminution of weight was being approached, there were quick, jerky decreases of weight which could not be maintained and the lost weight flew back. But the loss of 54% lb. given above (nearly half the medium's normal weight) was fairly held for eight or nine seconds while I was taking the reading. There were fluxes of 6 lb. or 8 lb. more than this, but they could not be held long enough to enable me to get a satisfactory reading. As I have said, it would seem that the matter was tending to be pulled back into the medium's body by something resembling a spring, for the more matter removed the stronger the restraining force became.

The above are a few of the results which are gradually leading me to the conclusion that the psychic rods which produce the phenomena are, for all their invisibility and impalpability, really

packed with matter, but matter which has taken on a form unknown to science.

Experiment 24 : To discover if there was any reaction pressure on the medium's chair, drawing-board under her chair, standard of the weighing machine, the floor round the weighing machine, or upon the surface of her tody, when the table was levitated.

The medium was seated on the weighing machine.

In order to test for mechanical pressure I employed the apparatus of Experiment 3 (fig. 10).

During periods when the table was steadily levitated, (a) I placed the pressure recorder on the drawing-board under the medium's chair, and moved it here, there, and all over it, sliding it right up to her feet (which were at rest on the drawing-board) ; then I raised it from the board into the air behind the calves of her legs.

Result. — No pressure indicated anywhere.

(b) I slid the pressure recorder all over the under-surface of the seat of the medium's chair.

Result. — No pressure indicated anywhere.

(c) I placed the pressure recorder on the standard of the weighing machine and on various other parts of the machine.

Result. — ~No pressure recorded anywhere.

(d) I slid the pressure recorder along the floor

right from the front of weighing machine platform to the region immediately below the levitated table. Result. — No pressure indicated anywhere.

(e) I slid the pressure recorder here and there along the floor at the side of the weighing machine.

Result. — No pressure indicated anywhere.

(f ) I placed the pressure recorder on the front of the medium's body just below her neck and slid it all over her arms and chest, covering every square inch of her body down to nearly the base of the trunk.

Result — No pressure indicated anywhere.

The operators did not wish me to proceed with the pressure recorder any lower than near the base of the trunk, and as I invariably give heed to their demands, I desisted.

From the results of this experiment it seems that when the table is levitated by means of a true cantilever, all the reaction is upon the body of the medium, and there is none upon the weighing machine, drawing-board, chair, or floor. That is to say, the cantilever issues straight from the body of the medium and is not fixed to, or supported in any way by the drawing-board, machine, chair or floor.

Experiment 25: To see if the operators could increase the weight of the medium without acting on any material body in the room, i. e., if they were able to add to the medium's weight by action upon her body alone.

I carefully explained the matter to the operators and told them they must not levitate the table, or act on it in any way, or, in fact, exert pressure on anything. Their action was to be limited to the body of the medium.

Result. — Under these conditions the operators were unable to increase the medium's weight in the slightest degree.



Chapter III. Miscellaneous

The question of electric conduction by psychic structure — Effect of medium touching the levitated table with her hands and with various articles such as glass and metal — Effect on phenomena of alteration of position of medium with respect to circle — Temperature measurements — Effect of screens in front of medium — Psychic body of medium.

Experiment 26 : To see if the end of the cantilever structure which presses on the undersurface of table and levitates it, is a conductor of low-tension electricity.

About the centre of the under-surface of the table I screwed two pieces of brass AA (fig. 23), each about 1% in. by 4 in., parallel to each other and about % in. apart.

An insulated wire was bared at the end and fixed to each, the wires being in an electric bell circuit. I placed the table upright on the floor and asked the operators to levitate it, and, while they were levitating it, to press upwards on,

MISCELLANEOUS

They

and across the two pieces of brass AA said they would try to do this.

After some manoeuvring the table levitated.

Result. — The bell did not ring.

The apparatus was tested prior to the experiment and found correct.

I asked the operators if they had placed the

Fig. 23.

end of the cantilever across the pieces of brass, but they informed me they had not. They said they were unable to place it across and had levitated the table from the region of under-surface beyond the metal.

Experiment 27 : To see if the free end of the cantilever structure is a conductor of lowtension electricity.

I turned the table (with apparatus fixed to it as in Experiment 26) upside down and asked the operators to place a rapping rod across the pieces of brass AA (fig. 23). They seemed to

accomplish this easily, for the rod could be heard scraping over the metal.

Asked if the end of the rod were properly across and touching both pieces of brass simultaneously, they answered in the affirmative.

Result. — Bell did not ring.

This result seems to show that the end of the rapping rod offers a somewhat high resistance to a low-tension electric current.

Experiment 28 : To see if the free end of the cantilever structure is a conductor of lowtension electricity.

The operators having failed to ring the electric bell in the manner described in Experiment 27, I decided to substitute for the bell a galvanometer, an instrument which measures electric currents of very small magnitude. Fig. 24 shows the arrangement, where AA are the two pieces of brass described in Experiment 26 (fixed about % inch apart — somewhat closer than in Experiment 26), G, the galvanometer, B, a dry cell, and WW insulated wires connecting the whole in series.

The operators were told to put the end of one of their psychic rods across both pieces of brass, or, if they could not do that, to pile some psychic matter across. If the end of the rod or the psychic matter were even a feeble conductor of

MISCELLANEOUS

current electricity, the needle of the galvanometer would deflect.

Fig. 24.

Result. — There was much scraping on the wood of the table in the neighbourhood of the brasses AA, and it was evident the operators were trying to do what was asked of them. They seemed, however, to experience much difficulty. By means of raps they said they had trouble in getting their psychic stuff across the pieces of brass AA. I gathered that the metal, whether because it was bright and polished, or simply because it was metal, or because it was electrified, repelled in some manner or other the psychic stuff. However, the operators said they

got across AA simultaneously two or three times.

There was on no occasion any deflection of the needle of the galvanometer.

Experiment 29 : Effect of medium touching the levitated table with her hands.

While the table was levitated in the usual way, one of the members of the circle thought the medium would like to feel its great resisting pressure. So she told the medium to take hold of the edge of the levitated table nearest her with her hands. The medium leaned over and did so. The effect was startling. No sooner did she touch it than the table dropped.

The table being again levitated, I seized it and noted its great resistance to my muscular pressure. Keeping my grip of the table I asked the medium to touch its edge. Within a second of her doing so the table dropped and every particle of resistance disappeared. Several times was the experiment tried and the result was always the same. Within two seconds at the most of the medium touching the edge of the table, all psychic resistance vanished. It did not disappear quite instantaneously, but took from a fraction of a second up to about two seconds.

What had happened? It appears that the medium by touching the wood of the table estab-

lished some kind of a psychic circuit. Perhaps the matter contained within the cantilever structure returned to her body via her hands and arms.

Experiment 30 : Effect of medium touching the levitated table.

At a date later than the occasion of Experiment 29, I carried out further tests on the effect of the medium touching the levitated table not only with her hands but with articles such as wood and glass.

The operators were told to levitate the table in the usual way, but to bring it a little nearer the medium than was customary so that she could easily touch it. They were asked to keep the table levitated if they could, until told to drop it. Each test was carried out several times.

(A) The medium touched the near edge of levitated table with her bare hand.

Result. — Table always dropped — not quite instantaneously but taking from 2 to 3 seconds.

This result is in agreement with the result of Experiment 29.

(B) The medium leaned over and placed her bare hand on the surface of the levitated table near its centre.

Result.— Table dropped in from 2 to 3 seconds— exactly as in test A,

(C) The medium touched the surface of levitated table with a glass tube which she held in her hand.

Results — The table dropped in from 5 to 6 seconds.

(D) The medium touched the surface of the levitated table with a piece of twisted paper which she held in her hand.

Result.- — No effect. The table did not drop.

(E) The medium touched the surface of the levitated table with a piece of wood about a foot long which she held in her hand.

Result. — No effect. The table did not drop.

(F) The medium lifted one of her feet and gently slid it up and down a near leg of the levitated table.

Result. — No effect. The table did not drop.

Seeing that the table did not drop I got the medium to touch its surface with her hand (simultaneously with the contact of her foot on its leg), when the table dropped with a crash.

Experiment 31: Effect of medium and others touching levitated table.

At a date a fortnight later than the occasion of Experiment 30, I carried out further tests on the effect of the levitated table being touched.

(G) The medium touched the levitated table

with (!) an iron poker and (2) a piece of copper wire.

Result; — The table dropped in both cases in from 6 to 7 seconds.

(H) The medium put on a glove (kid lined with silk) and touched the levitated table with it.

Results— The table dropped in about 8 seconds.

(I) The medium held her bare hand above the table as it rested on the floor and the table levitated until its surface came in contact with her hand.

Results — The table very quickly dropped.

(J) I clasped the medium's right hand in my left and I touched the levitated table with my other hand.

Result. — The table slowly dropped, the levitating energy seeming to be gradually sucked from it.

(K) The medium clasped the left hand of Mrs. Morrison (who was sitting on the right of the medium). Mrs. Morrison touched the levitated table with her right hand.

Result. — No effect; the table remained up quite steadily.

(L) Mr. Goligher (who was sitting on the left of the medium) grasped her left hand and touched the levitated table with his free hand.

Result. — No effect; the table remained up quite steadily.

(M) A visitor who was in the room watching the experiments grasped the left hand of the medium and touched the levitated table with his free hand.

Result — No effect; the table remained up quite steadily.

(N) All the sitters (except the medium) placed their hands simultaneously on the levitated table.

Result. — No effect.

Then the medium added her hand to the pile on the table.

Result. — The table dropped in a couple of seconds.

(O) The medium held her hand in the air near edge of the levitated table (but without touching it).

Result. — No effect.

(P) The medium held her hand in the space underneath the levitated table.

Result. — Table dropped.

Experiment 32: To discover the effect on the phenomena when the medium sits on her chair with her back to the circle.

The medium's chair was turned round through 180 degrees, so that she sat with her back to the circle.

Result. — Eaps were given in front of her, i. e., in the direction in which she was facing, outside the circle, and under her chair. No phenomena, however, could be obtained within the circle — not even the least movement of the table.

Experiment 33 : To discover the effect on the phenomena when the medium sits on her chair at right angles to the circle of sitters.

The medium's chair was turned through 90 degrees, so that the side of her body was presented to the centre of the circle.

Result. — The table was quite easily moved about the floor but was not levitated. The operators said they were able to use only one rod in this case, that one issuing from the medium's ankle nearer the table.

Experiment 34 : To see if it was possible to obtain levitations or movements of the table with the medium and all members of the circle standing.

The medium and sitters stood up. I asked that the table be levitated or moved about.

No levitation was obtained, but the table was quite easily moved about the floor. Raps were also easily given.

Experiment 35 : The effect of lightly grasping an ankle of the medium.

I put my hand lightly round the right ankle of the medium, at the same time asking questions of the operators. They answered with subdued, dull raps by means of a rod evidently taken — judging by the sound — from her free ankle. While the raps were occurring, the muscles of the ankle I was holding seemed to be squirming; it is not a very graceful word, but it is the only one which adequately describes the feeling. The foot was quite steady; it was only the muscles round ankle and lower part of calf which were trembling and vibrating sinuously.

Experiment 36 : To find if there is any alteration in the temperature of the table during a long levitation.

A friend had suggested that the operators may possibly abstract heat energy from the table to aid them in producing phenomena. This was a point of view which had not occurred to me. Accordingly, I made a hole in the centre of the top of the table and fixed the bulb of a thermometer tightly in it. The stem was held in an upright position by an arrangement of cardboard. I told

the operators to levitate the table for as long as they conveniently conld. The table immediately rose and remained in the air for more than 5 minutes.

Result:

Temperature just before the levitation = 24° C.

Temperature just after the levitation =» 24° C.

The greatest care was taken to get this result accurate and I am certain that there was no change of temperature exceeding % degree C. Hence it would seem that no, or very little, heat energy is abstracted from the table for the purpose of producing the phenomenon.

Experiment 37: Temperature of the psychic cantilever and psychic stuff generally.

The table being levitated, I held a Centigrade thermometer (of length about 6 inches) by the end and waved it about under the table. I slowly moved the thermometer across the space under the table, from legs to legs, at nearly all heights from floor to surface, covering practically all the space below table. This process occupied about 3 minutes, the table remaining quite easily in the air all the time. The crossing of all regions of space immediately below table did not affect the phenomenon in the least.

Result-— There was practically no alteration

in temperature from the temperature of the room. At the most there may have been a dej crease of % degree C. but I am not quite certain of it. At any rate the decrease was negligible, which seems strange, as the region under the levitated table often feels somewhat chill to the hand.

Not e. — If there was a psychic column — or vertical part of the cantilever — below table, as is usually the case, then I must have cut through this many times with the thermometer tube during the experiment. I felt, however, no resistance whatever, and the levitation was not affected in the least. The reader should note that it seems quite possible to cut through the columnar part of the cantilever without affecting the phenomenon, but impossible to cut through that part of the structure between table and medium without causing table to drop.

I placed a Fahrenheit thermometer, which was clipped to a wooden frame, on the floor within the circle and told the operators to touch the bulb with a psychic rod, and to pile psychic stuff upon it if they could. They were very quickly moving the instrument about the floor and apparently doing what was asked.

Result. — No difference of temperature from the temperature of the room.

SCREENS IN FRONT OF THE MEDIUM

Experiment 38: Wire netting in front of medium.

A piece of wire netting having holes through it about one square inch area, height about 2% feet and some 3 feet long, was placed in front of the medium, between her and the table. The sitter on each side of the medium held an end of it and put his foot on the bottom of it so as to keep the lower part of it on the floor. The consequence was that the operators were not able to act on the table except through the netting.

I asked the operators either to levitate the table or to move it about.

Result. — The table did not levitate, and did not move (it did move a little on two occasions but it was doubtful if the wire net were not touching the table at one point at the time). The operators were given plenty of time and evidently made great efforts to do what was asked of them. But the result was failure. The wire netting itself was often nearly pulled out of the hands of those holding it as the cantilever arm evidently tried to get through.

Experiment 39: Potato sack in front of medium. A fortnight after Experiment 38 was carried out I tried another kind of screen, viz., a cloth

100 EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL" SCIENCE

one. To be exact, it was a ripped-open potato sack and was of very open texture. When held up to the light the interstices between the threads were sufficiently great to allow one to see through.

The sitters on each side of the medium (myself assisting) held this screen in their hands, keeping it between her and the table. The sitters also put their feet on the bottom of it to keep it on the floor. The operators were asked to levitate the table, or move it about (if they could) through the screen.

After a few minutes the screen was pushed violently outwards by the psychic rod pressing on it. So great was the force applied that the three of us who were holding it could only with the greatest difficulty keep it in position (on one occasion, indeed, it was pushed clean out of our hands). The location of the pressure was quite low down, near the floor.

Results — After several futile trials the operators' gave up the attempt, saying that they could not get the structure through the screen, a fact which was perfectly obvious to me. 'The end of the psychic rod would appear to be solid or "materialised," and hence could not be pushed through the interstices of the cloth.

At first sight these negative results obtained with the wire netting and cloth screen may seem

strange. For does not the structure go through the clothing of the medium? It must do so if it issues from her body, and it seems to suffer no hindrance when so passing. Why, therefore, do quite porous screens when placed 6 inches in front of her prove altogether impenetrable to the psychic arm?

In order to find out something about this I wrapped the cloth screen (the potato sack) round the medium's body in the manner of an apron, tucking it round her tightly and putting it under her boots on the floor, so that, if the structure did issue it must go through the screen which was thus practically a part of her dress. The operators were asked to move the table about the floor and to levitate it.

Result. — The table was moved about the floor several times fairly easily, but could not be levitated. The phenomenon was evidently much more difficult when the medium was wrapped round with the sack than when she was free of it.

Other screens were tried of various kinds of cloth and cloth nets of several sizes of mesh. With the nets small movements of the table were sometimes obtained when such nets were placed upright before the medium a foot or so in front of her. I do not intend to go at length into this question here. Briefly, it may be shown that

L(l) the free end of an ordinary sized psychic rod cannot penetrate ordinary closely woven cloth screens when such screens are placed more than inch or two in front of the medium.

(2) if, however, such screens be wrapped tightly round the body of the medium, and especially so round her feet and ankles, fairly strong psychic action can take place through them.

(3) the closer such screens are to the body of the medium the stronger the psychic action through them.

(4) some slight psychic action can occur through fairly open cloth network placed a foot or more distant from the medium.

The reason for all this, as I shall show in a later work, is^ that the materialisation of the working or free end of the psychic rod occurs very close to the skin of the medium and even sometimes directly upon her skin. It is this materialised film of matter which, being formed at a maximum of an inch or two from her body, cannot pass through the screens ; that is to say, the end of the psychic rod is a film of ordinary solid matter and this, of course, cannot pass through matter interposed in its path. The thinnest psychic rods (about the thickness of a lead pencil) can get through a comparatively small mesh (see (4) above).

Experiment 40 : To see if the operators could write a message with a pencil,

A piece of brown paper was placed on the floor within the circle under the table, and two pencils (constructed by pieces of thick lead being inserted in wooden cylinders about 6 inches long and y2 inch diameter) were laid on top of the paper. The operators were soon moving the pencils about, raising them and dropping them on the floor, scraping with them and so on. When the brown paper was examined it was found to have a large number of pencil lines upon it, but no formed letters. The floor was similarly marked.

Experiment 41 : Attempt to weigh the psychic "body of the medium.

Many spiritualists and psychic investigators assert that man has two bodies, the physical one with which we are well acquainted and an immaterial or ethereal one about which we know nothing. The latter is supposed to be the duplicate of the former as regards shape and even to be the frame upon which it is built up. It is also supposed to be the vehicle through which man functions after death.

The reader should note that the operators

themselves say that each of us possesses this psychic body in addition to the physical.

I once tried to weigh the psychic body of my medium. She was seated on a weighing machine and I asked the operators to exteriorise her psychic body, i. e., to remove it from her physical body beyond the limits of the weighing machine. I wished to see if there would be any decrease in the weight of the medium when this was done, i. e., if her psychic body was susceptible to the force of gravity.

On the operators giving three little raps on the floor as a sign to me that they had done what I asked, I found that the medium's weight had decreased by about 8 lb. but that the decrease did not remain constant at 8 lb. but became less and less until there was practically no diminution at all ; and during the whole experiment the operators declared that the medium's psychic body remained exteriorised or placed beyond the limits of the weighing machine.

I thought at the time that the experiment was a failure and I am not now sure that there is much in it. It has, however, occurred to me as just possible that when the operators tried to remove the medium's psychic body they were unable to remove it per se, but had to take some physical matter along with it, i.e., some gross matter was mixed with the psychic body and,

this was gradually returned to the medium's physical body, as was evidenced by the gradual return of her weight, leaving the psychic form more and more nearly pure.



Chapter IV. Analysis of Results

The experiments described complete what I may call my investigation into the mechanical aspects of the phenomena at the Goligher circle. Upon them I rely for definite information — as apart from mere hypothesis which hitherto has been the only attempt at solution — concerning snch problems as the levitation of bodies without physical contact, the movement of bodies about the floor of the room, raps, knocks and so forth. I hope later on to show how these phenomena are only a special case of still simpler phenomena, i.e., those which occur with contact when the hands of the sitters, for instance, are upon the table and all sorts of violent movements occur not due, apparently, to muscular pressure. And I am going now to analyse the results obtained so that future investigators may have something to work upon, something which has at least the merit of experimental observation behind it and is therefore more than mere hypothesis.

Let us first consider the phenomenon of levitation. All the results obtained in the first series

of experiments were in agreement with the theory that a rigid beam or cantilever issues from some part of the medium's body. I have shown (see p. 34 seq.) that because the levitated body in those tests never weighed much more than 10 lb. while the medium was under experimental observation, that the moment of the weight of such body was insufficient to cause the medium to topple over in her chair. But we should expect that if the cantilever theory is a true explanation of the levitation process, that if the weight of the levitated body was gradually increased a moment would at length be reached which would have this effect. This was found to be so (see Experiments 1 and 2). Therefore, the cantilever theory received further corroboration. Accordingly, while not attempting to lay down an absolute law which may not need revision in the future, we may say provisionally that (1) The cantilever theory is correct as explaining one method of levitation. The question then arises whether the cantilever method is the only one used during levitation. There were several ordinary observational phenomena (as apart from experimental ones) which seemed to show there was another method in use. For instance, I had often seen the table levitated a foot or more in the air and a strong man pressing down upon it with all his strength who was nevertheless quite unable to

depress it to the floor. Yet the medium in this case showed no signs of toppling over, although the applied moment, on the cantilever theory, must have been more than sufficient to cause her to do so. Was another method in use? Experiments 2, 3, and 4 show that there was. Instead of a cantilever a beam evidently projected itself from the medium's body to the floor under the table or to the floor between the medium and the table ; from that point a more or less vertical projection rose to the table.

The net result was that most of the reaction was taken by the floor and not by the body of the medium, and hence there was practically no tendency to overturn on the medium's part. There was, in short, a psychic strut between the levitated table and the floor. The interesting Experiment 2 seems to show both processes in operation consecutively. Therefore, we may say (2) For levitated bodies of considerable weight a strut method is used.

This explains some of the points which seemed inconsistent in the first series of experiments.

The next questions that arise are : When is a cantilever used for levitation and when a strut? The answer is, that for comparatively light bodies a cantilever is almost invariably used and for heavy bodies or where the applied forces are great, a strut. The cantilever is a simpler piece of psychic mechanism than a strut. It is more

easily constructed. It does not require the expenditure of so much psychic energy. Therefore, it is used wherever possible. One has to remember that the psychic energy available in the seance room is strictly limited and that the more used up in any one phenomenon, the less the number of phenomena.

I have often watched the gradual petering out of phenomena at a circle owing to the lack of psychic energy, though often enough, on the other hand, phenomena are at their best towards the close of the seance time. In the latter case the original available energy was very great, the circle was harmonious and every one was in good health.

The operators themselves declare that for light bodies a cantilever is used and for heavy bodies a strut; which statements, as I have shown, are in agreement with experimental facts. Therefore,

(3) The cantilever method of levitation is made use of for light bodies or where the applied forces are small, and the strut method for heavy bodies or when the applied forces are large. In the first series of experiments there was considerable doubt as to what happened to the weight of the medium when the cantilever arm rested on the scalepan of a spring balance while the table was levitated above it. A very incom-

plete test of tha? series seemed to show that the weight of the medium actually increased. But a number of new experiments, very carefully carried out, showed that the weight of the medium really decreased regularly during this kind of levitation, and that, in fact, the reading on the spring balance minus the weight of the levitated table was, allowing for the experimental inaccuracies of the case, the actual amount of the decrease (see Experiments 6, 7, and 8). This is in agreement with the mechanics of a beam fixed to the medium's body and acted on by the given forces at its extremity.

The problem as to what happened to the weight of the medium when the weight of the table standing on the floor either upright or upside down was increased on demand, was not solved in the first series of tests. Experiments 10, 11, and 12, however, show pretty clearly that the medium's weight is reduced and that the amount of the reduction is equal, allowing for experimental inaccuracies, to the increased weight temporarily given the table. So the visitor to this, or any similar circle, may be pretty sure, when he finds that the seance table has become so heavy that he cannot lift it, or only lift it with difficulty, that the medium's weight is at the time correspondingly reduced. He is, in fact, trying to raise the medium when he attempts to lift the table under these conditions, though in

a manner which probably he never dreams of. The psychic arm projecting from the medium's body has hold of some part of the table with its free end (sometimes the under-surface and sometimes the legs of the table) and is pulling downwards, i.e., pressing it against the floor and thus apparently increasing its weight. The experimental results agree with the mechanics of the problem.

Several correspondents have written to me asking why the medium and the chair on which she was sitting were not bodily moved along the floor of the room or overturned, when a man pushed on the table as it stood on the floor, horizontally inwards towards the medium. If the cantilever theory is true and there was a rigid psychic bar connecting the table to the body of the medium, it was reasonable to suppose that for large forces applied to the table the medium and her chair would be forced along the floor. But at ordinary observational or demonstration seances this never occurred. At one seance three men pushed inwards on the table with all their strength — one even pushed backwards with his foot against the nearest wall to get a better leverage— but they were unable to make the table budge as it stood on the floor some feet from the medium. I decided to investigate the matter (see Experiments 13, 14, and 16). It is now

obvious that, as in the case of levitation, there are two methods in use :

(4) A simple psychic arm connects the table to

the medium — a bar which does not touch the floor — when the pressures applied to the table are light, or likely to be insufficient to move the medium's chair over the floor against friction.

(5) An inclined psychic strut connects the table

to the floor and thence to the body of the medium when the pressures applied to the table are likely to be heavy and sufficient to move the medium and her chair along the floor. Fig. 25 shows such a strut. It grips the leg of the table at A, descends to the floor at K, and thence proceeds upwards into the medium's body. AK would seemingly in most cases be fairly short. At K the psychic structure actually grips the floor by a kind of suction effect. It does not merely rest upon it. The reader can therefore readily see what happens when muscular pressure is applied to the table in the direction of the arrow. The pressure is transmitted to the floor, and so long as the bar AK is stiff enough to withstand the compressive stress and bending moment and so long as the grip which K has on the floor does not relax, there will be practically no effect on the medium. This is what occurs when in a demonstration seance a man

ANALYSIS OF RESULTS

is invited to push on the table as hard as he can. Occasionally the grip at K gives a little and in that case the medium and her chair are actually pushed back along the floor (see p. 64).

There is an important point about this type of psychic structure which I wish now to mention. If the arm AK (fig. 25) is fairly short, if it is sufficiently rigid, and if the grip of K on the floor is very firm, practically the whole of the reaction is taken by the floor. We have, in brief, a short rigid strut fixed to the floor at one end and to the table at the other. Hence it follows that the portion KS of the structure need

r

L

Q

Of o

-J

not be proportionately strong; in fact it might be absent altogether without affecting the magnitude of the phenomenon. That it is altogether absent, however, is not the case ; for occasionally, as I have mentioned, the grip which the part K has on the floor relaxes and when this happens the medium and her chair move back bodily along the floor, for the structure AKS becomes then practically a simple unsupported rod between the table and the medium, and considerable mechanical pressure is transmitted to the medium. We have here then a glimpse of the methods used in phenomena of a more advanced type than those which occur at the Goligher circle. If the mechanical pressure and reactions can be thrown off the medium and transmitted instead to the floor, and if at the same time connection can be maintained with the medium, then it is obvious that psychic structures might be built up at a considerable distance from the medium — at a much greater distance than occurs with Miss Goligher. But in phenomena of the Goligher type, which depend for their spectacular value on force magnitude, these structures have of necessity to be exceedingly rigid and strong and hence much psychic energy is used per unit length, if I may put it that way ; therefore, although such structures may sometimes not be simple projections from the body of the medium such as psychic arms issuing forth into

space and gripping the table without touching the floor, but may be built up mechanisms for transmitting mechanical pressures to the floor as shown in Fig. 25, yet such mechanisms, owing to the magnitude of the psychic energy and matter used in their construction and to the necessity of continually feeding them on a large scale, can only be constructed at a comparatively short distance from the medium. In order that phenomena should occur a long way from the medium the two following conditions must be fulfilled:

(a) The phenomena must be such that direct

mechanical reaction is not upon the medium.

(b) There must be no very large force magni-

tudes involved.

Sometimes it would appear that phenomena involving considerable force magnitudes do occur at a considerable distance from the medium, but in those cases I think it will invariably be found that such phenomena last only for a very short period of time and that there are considerable empty intervals of time both before and after their occurrence; whereas at the Goligher circle phenomena of great magnitude often endure over considerable intervals of time.

The reaction falling directly upon the body of the medium means that the whole structure from the medium's body outwards must be of suffi-

cient strength to resist the largest direct and bending stresses imposed, and this would imply that much psychic matter has to be used. Therefore, in order to have phenomena at any distance from the medium involves the reaction being not borne by her, but by the floor of the seance room.

The reader will now understand the essential scientific difference between phenomena such as materialisation and those occurring at the Goligher circle. In the former we have a psychic structure concentrated in space, with mechanical reaction on the floor (due to weight of materialised body) and a long unstressed link probably connecting structure to medium; in the latter we have for the most part a psychic structure occupying a comparatively large space, with mechanical reaction naturally on medium but sometimes with special trouble placed on the floor, and if the reaction is on the floor, only a short unstressed link connecting structure to medium.

It will be seen on studying Experiment 18 in which the medium was under experimental observation while she and the chair on which she was sitting were bodily moved about the floor of the seance room, that the only likely theory which accounts for the facts is one in which an unstressed, or only feebly stressed, feeding or connecting link unites the actual pushing structure with the medium's body. The reaction is

in this case taken by the floor of the room and none of it apparently finds its way to the medium.

Likewise, in some of the cases of levitation of the table where there is a strut below the table and where the base of this strut grips the floor adhesively, we have, in all probability, a further case of an unstressed or feebly stressed link connecting the base of the strut with body of medium; not in all cases of levitation, remember, such as where a true cantilever arm was bent up at its end to reach the level of a spring balance (see R.P.P., ch. vii) but only in those cases where the base of strut is firmly fixed to the floor.

I wish to impress upon the reader this idea of an unstressed or slightly stressed link connecting the main portion of a psychic mechanism with the body of the medium. Many of my experiments decidedly suggest that it is present. (6) An unstressed or but feebly stressed psychic link often connects a psychic structure which is "out" in the seance room, to the body of the medium. The question arises as to whether the structure itself possesses weight. I may say that this is a difficult matter to determine experimentally. One can never be sure when noting changes of weight on the part of the medium as she sits on the weighing machine and simultaneous readings

on another weighing machine placed on the floor within the circle space, whether the results are wholly due to mechanical forces exerted by the psychic structure or whether they are partly due to the weight of part of the structure itself. To illustrate this point we will consider the following example:

Floor Level.

Fig. 26.

Fig. 26 shows diagrammatically the medium M seated on the weighing machine A. On the floor about three feet beyond her is another weighing machine B. The operators are told to press downwards steadily on B. We find that the increase of weight on B is practically equal to the decrease on A. The operators are presumably pressing downwards on B with some kind of a psychic structure S. We have now the two cases to consider,

(a) that in which the structure S is weightless, and

(b) that in which the structure S possesses weight.

If (a) is in accordance with fact, the downward weight on B is due simply to mechanical pressure. If (b) is correct the downward weight on B is due to mechanical pressure plus pressure due to part of the weight of the structure S. In either case the experimental result is the same and the test affords no means of distinguishing whether the structure possesses weight or not.

Again, if I ask the operators simply to rest the end of the structure on B but not to exert any mechanical pressure, and I then find that there is a reading on B, I cannot be sure that this reading is solely due to the weight of part of the structure; for the operators may really be exerting mechanical pressure and I have no means of checking their statement that they are not doing so. On the other hand if I find there is no reading on B, I cannot be sure that the structure is weightless for I am unable to say if the structure is really resting on B at all.

The reader must remember that these structures are practically invisible even in quite good red light and that if the hand is put through one of them the only thing felt is a kind of disagreeable, cold, spore-like sensation, and the placing of the hand in its line generally breaks up the structure. The difficulty, therefore, of determining if the structure possesses weight by any

method in which psychic pressure is exerted is obvious. A method which might be used would be to determine an alteration in the position of the centre of gravity of the medium. Her centre of gravity would have first to be accurately found when no psychic structure projected and then again with the structure projecting. For the latter, the operators would have to be asked to project a psychic arm from the medium's body into the air in front of her, and to hold it in position there. I have found that they can do this. If the arm possessed weight the position of her centre of gravity would of course alter. Such an experiment would be very difficult to carry out satisfactorily.

I may say that the operators themselves declare that their structures possess weight. If we could be quite sure that the operators do exactly what is asked of them, for example, that they simply rest a structure on the scalepan of a weighing machine when required to do so, and exert no mechanical pressure whatever, then the solution of the problem would be easy. For always under these conditions it is found that the structure possesses weight.

If the reader will now turn to Experiments 19-23 he will find some data having to do with this question of the weight of the various psychic structures. The extraordinary results there obtained go to the very heart of the matter. It will

be noted that I asked the operators to do various things :

(a) To place loosely on the floor psychic matter

used for the building up of structures.

(b) To build up a psychic rod of large dimen-

sions and to rest the end of it on the floor.

(c) To take as much matter from the medium's

body as they possibly could and to rest it on the floor.

In each of the above cases a large decrease in weight of the medium was noted, amounting to about half her weight in Experiment 23.

What sort of matter is this that is seemingly removed from the medium's body, is used to build up psychic structures, and possesses weight? Here we have the great problem connected with psychic phenomena. Its solution will advance our knowledge of the subject enormously. Certainly this matter — if it be matter and a great number of experiments tend to show this is the case — is not in any form with which we are acquainted in a scientific sense. Although, of course, the number of experiments I have carried out is quite insufficient to enable me to lay down any absolute law (it will take many men in all probability many generations to do that) yet I think I am justified in mentioning some of the points which have struck me as important in connection with the case, and the one thing above all others that has astonished

me is that this matter seems to have practically no palpability. It is matter without palpability, but it seems to possess weight. The method by which it is expelled from the medium's body is a mystery. Only this is certain — that it is usually expelled in fluxes, not steadily, and that the difficulty in expelling it increases with the quantity expelled.

(7) In order to build up the psychic structures

and to produce phenomena matter seems to be driven out of the medium's body.

(8) This matter seems to possess weight, some-

times as much as 50 lb.

(9) It seems to be present in a form with which

science is not acquainted. (10) Small amounts may be expelled steadily from the medium's body, but after a certain amount has been driven forth, the expulsion of the rest is evidently difficult and is accomplished in fluxes. Now, one would think that if 50 lb. weight of matter was driven from the medium's body, the medium would visibly shrink in size. I did not notice any difference in Miss Goligher. But I have seen photographs of the Italian medium Zarancini while he was bodily levitated, i.e., raised and at rest in the air, and in his case a curious translucency of his body is observable. He seems to be partly transparent, although his bulk or volume does not appear to be much altered.

Probably an invisible psychic structure is below him supporting him in the air, the material for which has been driven from his body in the manner such matter is driven from Miss Goligher. Thus the medium's body may not much alter in bulk but its density may substantially decrease during the occurrence of powerful telekinetic phenomena.

I am not going into a detailed account of the psychic structures at the Goligher circle in this volume. It is sufficient to say here that these structures are quite complicated mechanisms and by no means the simple things we might have expected.

It is now necessary to consider the fact that the medium never feels anything in the nature of mechanical pressure on any part of her body. Even in the case when she and the chair on which she was sitting toppled over during heavy levitation (see Experiments 1 and 2), she felt nothing. She told me that the feeling was exactly similar to what one gets when sitting on a seesaw. I wondered if a portion of the reaction, which was apparently on the medium, was not really upon some part of her chair, or on the drawingboard under her chair, or on the platform or rail of the weighing machine, for, if the reaction were upon any or all of these, the weighing machine would still include it. All one could say definitely was, that in a simple case of levita-

tion the whole reaction appeared to be upon the medium's body, although it might possibly be upon some part of the apparatus in her immediate neighbourhood which was resting on the platform of the weighing machine or upon the machine itself. Experiment 24 seems to show, however, that the whole of the reaction really falls somehow directly upon the body of the medium. How can it be that a rigid structure some two or three feet long can issue from the medium's body and support 30 or 40 lb. weight at its end and the medium experience no inconvenience? If a rigid bar of this nature entered some soft part of her body, say the region of the stomach, the flesh would be lacerated by such a leverage as that mentioned above. How then is it that the medium is never injured by these mechanical reactions and never even feels them? A possible explanation is as follows :

The psychic structure where it enters the body of the medium is composed of a kind of matter which is unknown. Let us call it X-matter. This X-matter can transmit through itself ordinary direct and shear stresses, but it cannot transmit such stresses from itself to ordinary matter. In order to accomplish this it has first to be converted into another form of matter which we may term Y-matter (really the kind of matter visible to the eye at a materialisation seance; in other words Y-matter is what is known to psy-

chic research students as "materialised" matter). We have then X-matter which can only be converted into Y-matter (in a manner analogous to water being converted into ice), and stresses transmitted through the former can be sent on through it to the latter. The Y-matter can act on physical objects in the seance room.

The rough outline of a psychic structure is then as follows:

(a) Free end (which we will suppose is gripping

the seance table) ; Y-matter.

(b) Body of structure: X-matter. The structure

as it enters the physical body of the medium is entirely composed of X-matter.

(c) Within the body of the medium the X-mat-

ter composing the structure is again converted into Y-matter.

The sequence of mechanical action is as follows:

The Y-matter at the free end of, say, the psychic cantilever, grips the wood of the under-surface of the table which is then levitated. Weight of table is transmitted to this Y-matter and from the latter to the X-matter of the body of structure. The mechanical stress is transmitted along the X-matter right into the body of the medium. At the place where the structure enters the body of the medium, no stress of any kind is transmitted to her flesh, because, at this particular place we have X-matter and ordinary physical

matter in juxtaposition, and stress cannot be directly transmitted from the former to the latter. Within the interstices of the medium's body the X-matter of the psychic structure probably ramifies out and each ramification at its extremity becomes Y-matter and this Y-matter is attached to various interior portions of the medium's body, which thus finally, and indirectly takes the weight of the table.

For the same reason, also, practically no palpability is experienced when one cuts through the psychic structure with the hand, or with, say, a piece of wood. The X-matter of the body of the structure cannot directly transmit stresses to the hand or the wood. It requires first to be converted into its derivative, Y-matter, in order to be able to do so.

This very imperfect little sketch will give the reader some idea of the problems we have to attack when we deal with psychic phenomena of the physical order. That something analogous to the above actually occurs I have little doubt. Whether the X-matter is matter existing temporarily on a fourth-dimensional plane, or whether it is some form of matter with which we can one day deal I would not like to conjecture.

The operators themselves declare that the medium is somehow protected from the ordinary mechanical stresses to which she would naturally seem to be exposed. But they can tell us

nothing at all satisfactory as to how the protection is afforded.

Although I have no direct proof it would seem also that during the occurrence of phenomena, the body of the medium is less sensitive than it normally is to tactual impressions. The medium is never in trance, but from late observations I would hesitate to say that her state of consciousness is quite normal. Especially at the commencement of a seance she dislikes to be spoken to. But if there is any abnormality it is very slight, indeed, and would altogether escape the notice of any one who had not a prolonged acquaintance with her under ordinary and under seance conditions.

I turn now to a consideration of the strange results obtained when the medium touched the table with her hand, feet and with articles such as pieces of wood or glass (Experiments 29, 30, and 31).

The most startling fact that emerges from these tests is that the levitated table drops in from one to two seconds if the medium touches it with her bare hands. If she touches it with her gloved hands it takes longer to drop. If she touches it with a glass rod, or a bar of iron it still drops. If she touches it with a piece of twisted paper or a piece of wood it does not drop. When she touches it with her boot it does not drop. It does not drop when she holds her

hand in the air above it. When the members of the circle singly or altogether touch it it does not drop bnt immediately the medium adds her hand to the pile it drops.

What are we to make of all this? Why especially should the table invariably drop in from one to two seconds after the medium puts her bare hand upon it?

The most likely reason is that there is something in the table which is essential to levitation and which cannot remain in the table when the medium puts her hand on it but must flow along her hand and arm into her body. The experiments would indicate that the properties of this substance — I call it a substance, but of course, it may not be a substance in the ordinary sense — are as follows :

(1) It must be of a very fine nature and invisi-

ble, for nothing of it can be seen on the table.

(2) It has something to do with the medium, for

when people other than the medium and not in physical contact with her body touch the levitated table it does not drop.

(3) The medium's bare hand is most effective

in conducting this substance from the table to her body.

(4) Some substances conduct it more slowly

than others, while some do not seem to conduct it at all.

(5) The air does not conduct it.

(6) From several persons experimented with,

my body seemed the only one which conducted it and that only very slowly.

(7) It is essential to the phenomenon of levita-

tion.

The following remarks are only tentative and made on the chance that they may supply a hint or two which will be useful to investigators.

This mysterious "something" which appears to be in or on the levitated table is certainly not electricity. For one thing its rate of discharge is too slow and for another nothing that has ever occurred in the seance room has even suggested electric action. It is most likely a form of energy connected with very small particles of matter. Probably these particles are accumulated in and upon the wood of the table and their inherent energy used up by the operators as required. They are probably particles connected with the nervous system of the medium.

The psychic structure seems to issue, as a general thing, from the lower part of the legs of the medium. These energy particles seem to return via her hands. There may be a kind of psychic positive pressure in the legs and feet and a kind of psychic negative pressure in the arms and hands, so that there is a tendency for the particles to flow back to her body via the hands and arms if a conducting material or path is supplied

to them. To use an electrical analogy there is a higher psychic voltage in the neighbourhood of her ankles than of her hands.

The reader should clearly try to understand the two essential processes that occur in the seance room during the occurrence of physical phenomena of the telekinetic order. A vast deal of experimenting has shown me that these processes are as follows:

(a) The projection by the operators into the seance room of psychic rods, arms or structures. These are only temporary productions and return to the body of the medium, whence they came, at the conclusion of the seance; or more exactly, they keep coming and going from the medium, as they are required, during the seance time. It seems most likely that they are composed, or at any rate partly composed, of matter borrowed from the medium's body, and the weight of this matter may, in an extreme case, amount to 40 or 50 lb. But at the conclusion of the phenomena the structure returns to the medium's body and of course all the matter with it. Hence this kind of matter which the medium supplies is only supplied temporarily and the medium at the conclusion of the seance loses nothing.

(b) The supplying of some kind of energy which is used to enable the psychic structures to do their work, i.e., to levitate tables and so on. This energy seems also to be associated with matter, but not with the kind of matter which is used to build up the structures. For the matter associated with the energy is a permanent loss. It is also very much less in quantity than the temporarily borrowed structure-matter. I have every reason to believe from a long experience of the seance room, that a physical medium is a person whose physical organism is capable of supplying temporarily quantities of this structurematter and that a good sitter is a person who can supply a quantity of energymatter. In other words the function of the medium is to lend from her body psychic matter and the function of the sitters is to supply psychic energy. The reader will therefore understand that it is necessary to have at a circle a number of sitters so that a sufficiency of this psychic energy may be available. At the moment, then, we are probably dealing with process (b), when we consider the results of experiments in which the table drops when the medium touches it with her hand. Some of this energy-matter has most likely been lodged

in the wood of the table so that it may be available by the operators as required. The sitters have supplied it, but it has become associated in some way with the organism of the medium. It is what spiritualists loosely term "magnetism" and it seems to have a special predilection for articles made of wood; that is to say, when placed upon wood it does not tend to dissipate (see the experiment in which the medium touched the levitated table with a piece of wood without affecting the levitation) .

I have carried out some experiments which would indicate that at all sittings for physical phenomena there is a permanent loss of weight amongst the members making up the circle. These tests seem to show that it is the sitters and not the medium who lose most weight. Some sitters lose more than others, some lose none, while the medium as a rule loses a small amount. In K.P.P., ch. viii, the results of one such test with the Goligher circle are given. The following are some further results of weighings just before and just after seances :

Eesults for an ordinary table seance where the sitters' hands were in contact with the table throughout. A drawing-board was placed upon the platform of a weighing machine and a chair upon the drawing-board. The board and chair together weighed 18% lb. and this is included in the weights given below— ■*

Weights just before Weights Just after

seance — pounds seance — pounds

Mr. X. (medium) 163 % 163 %

Miss A 125 1243^

Mrs. B 1423^ 142

Mrs. C 165% 164%

The following are the results for the same sitters but for another contact seance :

Weights just before Weights just after

stance — pounds seance — pounds

Mr. X (medium) 1643/6 164^

Miss A 126 12534

Mrs. B 141% 141^

Mrs.C 164% 164M

Further similar results will foe found in a later chapter dealing with experiments on the "direct voice."

As a control experiment I weighed three friends. We then sat round a small table and indulged in a game of cards for an hour and a quarter. I then re-weighed them but could not find the least difference from the former weighings in any of them. Needless to say, in all 'the above cases proper precautions were taken that no material object was added to or subtracted from the person of any of the persons concerned between the time of the first and last weighings.

Such experiments as these seem to indicate that there is a small permanent loss of weight amongst the members composing the circle and that the sitters are more concerned in it than the

medium; and that this loss is quite apart and distinct from the temporary and often large losses that the medium experiences during the seance. I think that this permanent loss is connected with the psychic energy or "magnetism," supplied mostly by the sitters.

In one flashlight photograph which I have of Miss Goligher, taken during a seance, there are faint traces of a dark substance issuing from or proceeding into each of her fingers as her hands rest on her knees. These markings appear like faint prolongations of her fingers. They seem to go straight down the front of her skirt to the neighbourhood of her ankles.

It is also well known among people who make a practice of sitting for "contact" phenomena that at the commencement of the seance there appears to issue from the tips of the fingers a peculiar kind of gaseous substance, the ejecting of which can be quite plainly felt. The fingers usually become quite cold while this process is going on. It always occurs at the beginning of the seance and is in abeyance later on.

Again, too much sitting in circles has a bad effect on the health of many people. They seem to lose vital or nervous energy, the loss of which appears to require a considerable period of time to make good.

So that taking everything into consideration, I think there can be little doubt that upon or

in the levitated table there is accumulated a store of psychic energy ; that this energy is connected with small particles of matter ; that these particles have a tendency to return to the body of the medium, and that without them no phenomena are possible.

Experiments 26, 27, and 28 seem to show that the free end of the psychic structure does not conduct low-voltage electricity. But if the reader will turn to Experiments 80, 81, and 82 R.P.P., he will find that the structure discharges an electroscope. This would appear to show that the Y-matter at the extremity is a poor conductor, in a similar fashion to the skin of the human hand, to low- voltage electric currents, but that if it touches something which is at a high voltage it causes a discharge to earth, just, for example, as the hand would do.

The action of screens placed in front of the medium is just what we might expect from our knowledge that the free end of the structure is materialised, or practically ordinary matter. Unless the psychic rods are very small the materialised ends cannot be pushed through the interstices of the threads or wire. If the screens are very close to the medium's body, that is to say, practically in contact with her, an imperfect kind of materialisation of the ends may be effected beyond the screens and limited psychic action may occur.



Chapter V. Questions and Answers

I give below a series of questions which' have been addressed to me at various times. I am quite aware that the answers are very incomplete, but they are the best I can give at this stage of our knowledge of psychic processes and phenomena :

(1) Q. Does the application of force by the psychic structure present any analogy to the way in which force is transmitted by water through a tube?

A. In some examples of phenomena it does. For instance, in the case in which the table is turned upside down on the floor and is then apparently "glued" to the floor, the psychic apparatus may be likened to a tube projecting from the medium and filled with water. In the medium's end we can suppose there is a piston and also a piston at the other end, and that this second piston presses on the table. When a force is applied to the first piston, the pressure is transmitted through the water to the second and thence to the table.

Generally, it is possible to conceive of a psychic structure as a stiff tube filled with an incompressible fluid, the tube itself having the power to lengthen and shorten and to move up and down.

It is also possible to imagine that raps, blows, etc., could be transmitted through such an apparatus.

In the case in which the medium and the chair on which she is sitting are bodily pushed along the floor, the application of water pressure transmitted along tubes is comprehensible (see Experiment 18).

It is necessary to say, however, that the idea of fluid pressure transmitted along a rigid tube is no more than an analogy.

(2) Q. Does the psychic structure resist pulls as well as pushes?

A. Yes. It also resists torques. When the trumpet is psychically held up in the air, the experimenter may grasp the end of it and endeavour to turn it. He finds that he can turn it through a few degrees, but that the resistance to further twisting soon becomes so great that he is unable to proceed. The structure resists forces applied to its free end just as an ordinary solid body does. But the likeness of the structure to a solid body does not appear to go much further than this.

(3) Q. Is there any possibility that some, or

all, of the energy required for the manifestations is a form of heat energy ; i.e., is it possible that the operators can abstract supplementary energy from a table by slowing down its molecular movements?

A. It does not seem likely. During a long levitation I could not discover any fall of temperature in the table (see Experiment 38). There is much evidence that the energy required is taken only from the bodies of the sitters, such evidence including loss of weight, physical fatigue after a seance, nervous bodily reactions, etc.

(4) Q. In a good seance do phenomena go on continuously without periods of rest?

A. No. They are never continuous. After a burst of phenomena there is a period of quiescence as though time were required for the collection and storage of psychic energy. It would appear that at least some of this energy is stored on or within the wood of the table (see Experiments 29, 30, and 31).

(5) Q. What do you mean when you use the term "psychic equilibrium"?

A. I have used this term, in default of anything better, to mean that the preliminary stage of instability at a seance is over — the stage in which phenomena are as a rule weak, sporadic, and unreliable, and in which the operators would appear to be paying more attention to col-.

lecting quantities of psychic energy from the bodies of the sitters than to producing really good phenomena — and that a kind of equilibrium has been established in which there is a reserve of energy to draw upon. The two stages are analogous, for instance, to that in which steam is being raised in a large boiler and that in which this process has been completed and the boiler is in steady working order.

(6) Q. What is the medium's condition during and after the seances? Does her respiration or pulse increase during levitation? Is she exhausted at the end? In fact does she supply the energy as well as the material?

A. Her general condition after a seance seems much the same as before it. She does not seem in the least fatigued, although, she tells me, she is inclined to sleep longer than usual the following morning. I have no data with regard to pulse or respiration. During the seance she supplies the material but not (or only a very little of) the energy. The function of the sitters is to supply the energy.

(7) Q. Have raps ever occurred while the medium has been asleep?

A. Yes. On several occasions, I have been informed by her sisters, rapping has taken place while she has been sound asleep. Most often she was not wakened thereby. The members of the circle had a verbal agreement with the op-

erators that the latter should not interfere with the medium at any time except during seances. This arrangement the operators loyally kept to with the exception of occasional rapping at night in her bedroom, which I think was done for some special reason.

(8) Q. What is your experience of clairvoyance in connection with the Goligher circle?

A. Very involved and on the whole unsatisfactory. In E.P.P. I gave one example of clairvoyance by a lady who is psychically developed and who seems really to have seen something of the actual physical processes involved. A gentleman, who has had a fairly good scientific training and who is also a psychic, has likewise given me an account which agrees to some extent with several processes of which he was ignorant. But on the whole the results have been disappointing, at any rate as far as descriptions of the actual psychic structures are concerned. As at all circles, some very wonderful and impossible things are alleged to have been seen by people who were under the delusion they possessed the clairvoyant faculty. Several persons declared that they beheld spirits actually holding up the table with their hands — a result which would simplify the problem of levitation considerably if only it were true.

!With regard to what clairvoyants have seen of the operators themselves the same kind of

thing holds. I have heard clairvoyants describe in minute detail various spirit forms they said they saw in the room, and, while they were giving their descriptions, raps, loud and happysounding, were heard on the floor, apparently in confirmation of what the clairvoyants saw. On the other hand spirit forms have been seen which I am sure existed only in the imaginations of the "seers" themselves.

If the experimenter had to depend upon clairvoyance for information concerning the psychic processes at the Goligher circle he would be leaning on a broken reed. I have never received the slightest help from it during all the years I have been experimenting. In my experience clairvoyance is a faculty not much to be depended upon even in that region where we might expect it to be supreme, the psychic.

(9) Q. What is your opinion of the question of conscious or unconscious fraud at seances for physical phenomena?

A. While recognising that both varieties of fraud exist, I am confident that they have been much overrated. Even at seances, such as the Golighers', where everything is above suspicion, where all phenomena can be demonstrated with the greatest ease to be genuine to the last detail, things happen which to a superficial observer might appear fraudulent. For instance, sometimes the medium's body, or portions of her

body, make spasmodic kinds of movements when heavy raps or impacts are being experienced far out in the circle. These are simply the reactions due to the raps and are what we might expect. The seeker after fraud (who, by the way, is usually a person with no knowledge ox science) immediately puts them down to imposture. My experiments, conducted over a long period of time and more thoroughly than any ever carried out hitherto, have proved to me beyond all question that the medium's body is either directly or indirectly the focus of all the mechanical actions which result in phenomena. And not only is it the focus but it also seems to supply a kind of duplicate of portions of her body, which can be temporarily detached and projected into the space in front of her. Thus things happen in the seance room which, from the very nature of the case, sometimes bear a superficial appearance of fraud, though, in a properly conducted circle it is only superficial, and the true and genuine nature of the phenomena can always be discovered by a little investigation. I am therefore chary of accepting offhand any fraud hypothesis. Many of the cases of fraud which have been brought forward against mediums I know to be untrue, and further, I know (which the authors of the fraud theory do not) exactly where the truth lies and in what way a genuine manifestation has borne

the appearance of a fraudulent one. This occasional similarity of genuine and fictitious phenomena is very disconcerting to the investigator when he meets it for the first time and has, I venture to say, put a period to much promising work in the psychic field. But the man who is not ready to go thoroughly into details and hunt out the ultimate causes of things is of no use in the seance room.

(10) Q. Has there been much interest shown in your researches, especially by scientists?

A. Yes. I have had letters from people in all walks of life who wished some point made clearer in connection with the phenomena. I have had many valuable suggestions with regard to experimental work from scientific men in many parts of the world. And I am altogether agreeably surprised at the great interest taken generally in the subject. To judge from the scathing articles which occasionally appear in the press, an outsider might be justified in concluding that psychic phenomena and psychic subjects in general are mere humbug, and that those who deal with them are also humbugs, though perhaps self-deluded ones. The superior attitude of most of the press is highly amusing. It is based, I think, on the assumption that the general public know nothing of psychic things, whereas the truth is that nowadays eight people out of ten know something of them. I should

144 [EXPERIMENTS IN. PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

say, judging from my experience, that the newspaper which takes upon itself the responsibility of declaring everything connected with psychic research to be humbug, and which even conducts a campaign against it, will surely offend a host of its readers. People do not go about advertising their belief that a spiritual world actually exists — a world whose existence can to some extent be demonstrated by experiment— but nevertheless there are very many people in the world to-day with this belief and their number is steadily growing.

The kind of work which I have carried out and, in fact, am still continuing, has for its object the placing of as many of the processes as possible connected with psychic phenomena before the educated world, so that others may be encouraged to follow, whereby in time such an accumulation of scientific testimony and facts may be gathered that no thoughtful man may any longer doubt. I desire to help in the discovery of the psychic laws, which are as real as physical ones, so that in the years to come there may be no more mystery. If there is no mystery there will be no mystery mongers.

(11) Q. Is ordinary scientific experience of much avail when conducting experiments in the seance room?

A. In conducting experiments in an ordinary mechanics laboratory we work with certain in-

struments or machines which can be relied upon to do what they are asked to do ; in other words, if we make proper dispositions we can obtain a certain amount of accurate results for a given amount of mental and physical work. We apply, for instance, a force of a certain number of pounds to a certain part of a given machine and we can always rely upon a certain effect due to this force. In psychic work it does not follow that a given cause produces always the same effect. In ordinary scientific work our tools are obedient to our commands. Unknown factors can be almost eliminated. In psychic work our tools are often anything but obedient to our commands and the unknown factors are predominant.

The truth is that the human factor in psychic work is the most troublesome and unreliable. No physical phenomena can be produced without the aid of a human being (usually termed a medium) and in addition several other human beings (called sitters) are often required.

If the experimenter can overcome the great stumbling block of the human factor, he will make progress and will find a use for his scientific knowledge. But until he learns, possibly only by long experience, how to control the human element necessarily concerned in his experiments, he will not make much headway. I

'146 EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

was lucky in having a medium like Miss Goligher to work with.

(12) Q. In the two years that have passed since the publication of "The Reality of Psychic Phenomena," have you changed your opinion in regard to the identity of the "operators"?

A. No. I am quite satisfied in my own mind that the operators are discarnate human beings. Of course I am not primarily interested in this phase of the matter. The methods by which the phenomena are produced are what I am chiefly concerned with, and whether the operators are what they claim to be or are masquerading subconscious elements of the medium's brain does not much matter to me. It is sufficient for my purpose that there are intelligences of some kind in charge of the phenomena. Nevertheless I have seen and heard sufficient at the Goligher and other circles to convince me that man does not really die at physical death but passes on to another state of existence, and that, for the most part, the entities who demonstrate at good seances are really human beings who have so passed on.

(13) Q. What is the best form of phenomena considered solely from the point of view of obtaining messages from inhabitants of the psychic realm?

A. In my opinion, the "direct voice," At a direct voice seance people who have "died" speak

audibly in an objective voice. Many readers will probably not believe this, but nevertheless, however incredible it may seem, it is a fact. Unfortunately a good direct voice medium is an extremely rare personage. I think there are not above half a dozen in Great Britain to-day.

(14) Q. Is the "direct voice" more satisfactory than materialisation?

A. Yes, from the point of view of obtaining messages. Materialisation phenomena require such a large expenditure of psychic energy that the quantity of this kind of phenomena is strictly limited at any given seance even with the best mediums. In the case of the "direct voice," however, the amount of psychic energy required seems to be very much smaller, with the consequence that a corresponding increase in the magnitude of results is obtained.

(15) Q. Is it dangerous for people who are not in good health to sit in seances?

A. Yes. The sitters supply most of the energy required for the manifestations and this energy is taken in some unknown form from their bodies. If a person is in poor health the drain of vital energy may be disastrous.

(16) Q. Has the holding of so many seances in any way affected the health of Miss Goligher?

A. No. But great care was taken to see that

she did not sit too often — never, except in very special cases, more than once a week.

(17) Q. What do you think of the future in store for psychic research?

A. I think it will have a great future. All indications point 'that way. But there will have to be organised effort and not merely the sporadic experiments of a few. The recent war, as one of its few welcome by-products, seems to have opened the eyes of a great many people to the importance of the subject, and the interest thus created is not likely to lapse. For, in the last analysis, psychic research and psychic research only is likely to determine in any definite way whether man does or does not continue to exist after physical death.

(18) Q. Have you found phenomena of the physical order so rare as most people think they are?

A. No. Of course, mediumship such as Miss Goligher's is rare. But I know several other persons who can obtain movements without contact, and I am confident that if I had the time to give to them and they had the time to sit regularly, good non-contact phenomena would eventually be obtained in their cases. As it is, I have obtained some data from experiments I have carried out with them.

(19) Q. How would you recommend an ex-

perimenter desirous of undertaking psychic research to proceed?

A. I think it would be well he should confine his attention to one small branch of the subject. The subject is already so vast that no man can tackle it all. Time should not be wasted in eternally seeking to verify the actuality of the phenomena. When the experimenter has satisfied himself that the phenomena with which he is dealing are genuine he should not seek to satisfy all the world, for that is impossible. He should go ahead and try to discover the mechanism of the phenomena and the laws regulating them. Psychic phenomena are quite as real as any other and the man who nowadays denies their occurrence on a priori grounds is not worth wasting time upon.

(20) Q. Should not the fact that light affects the magnitude of physical phenomena give us some clue to the composition of the psychic structures?

A. Yes, but it is difficult to say how. I once experienced the effect of light on these structures at the Goligher circle in a rather impressive way. The body and chair of one of the sitters was casting a shadow on a portion of the floor within the circle space. A rapping rod was "out" and was rapping on various parts of the floor. At my request it rapped on a portion of the floor where the light was strong and the en-

suing sounds were muffled and dull. It then rapped a few inches further along the floor within the shadow of the chair and the resulting sounds were hard and strong. It rapped half a dozen times in the light and in the shadow alternately and the result was always as stated. It changed quickly from the light to the shadow and just as quickly the loudness of the blows changed. As a matter of fact, the operators were actually giving me a simple demonstration on the effects of light upon their structures.

The effect of light in the seance room is immediate. I think the peculiar form of matter of which the structures are partly composed is quickly and adversely affected. Light of long wave length like red light is least troublesome, which points to the fact that the matter of the psychic structures must exist in a delicate and unstable form.

At the Goligher circle we once substituted mauve glass for the customary red glass of the illuminating lantern. We waited for quite a long time for phenomena. Eventually the seance table jerked about the floor two or three times. But that was all that occurred. The only light we could use with the certainty of getting good phenomena was the red.

It is possible that light of some particular wave length in the visible spectrum may not be injurious to phenomena. All that can be said at

present is that the longest wave length seems best and indeed the only possible. Nevertheless, there may be some wave length well np the spectrum which, when nsed alone, and not in combination with other wave lengths on either side of it, may be permissible. But this is a matter for exact and painstaking experiment. I need not enlarge on the advantages that would accrue if a type of radiation could be found which would strongly illuminate the seance room and at the same time not be hurtful to phenomena. Only the most powerful mediums have been able to produce strong physical phenomena in daylight and even then the period of such phenomena was of the briefest. Materialisation of the full form has, I understand, only been accomplished in daylight on one or two occasions and then only after prolonged sitting under the most suitable conditions with a strong medium of this class.

(21) Q. Is photography likely to play an important part in psychic research of the future?

A. I am inclined to think so. Indeed, I think that we may look for the chief advance along this line. There seems to be no doubt that by the aid of a certain peculiar type of mediumship, psychic "extras" can be made to appear on the ordinary photographic plate — these "extras" being in many cases pictures of deceased relatives or friends of the sitters. Unfortunately, this

class of result is very susceptible to fraud. All sorts of faked effects can be produced on an ordinary photographic plate and the amateur has little chance of discriminating between the true and the false. Nevertheless, there is evidence to show that genuine psychic "extras" are obtained when the proper quality of mediumship is present. The most convincing results are seldom made public. The facts of many cases have, however, been placed before me in confidence and I can only come to the conclusion, after thorough examination, that the "extras" are indeed photographs of deceased people — pictures impressed on the plate by means we know nothing about at present. Our ignorance of the method is of little relative importance. The levitation of a table was as mysterious to me as the production of photographic "extras" before I took up the investigation. What is required is continued investigation with the object of unravelling the laws — experiment and more experiment. Things are incredible only when we cannot understand how they are done. It is one of my objects in publishing the results of my researches into psychic phenomena to induce others to take a scientific interest in these subjects.

There is a kind of psychic photography besides that in which "extras" are obtained on the plate. I mean that in which flashlight exposures are

made of processes in connection witH physical phenomena, such as levitation or materialisation. These photographs have of necessity to be taken by flashlight because the phenomena of this class cannot be obtained in any but dim light. The photograph of the levitating structure described in B.P.P., Experiment 87, was of this kind.

The effect on the medium of the flashlight is always severe. After the flash by means of which we succeeded in obtaining the above picture, Miss Goligher trembled violently for ten minutes or more. Her arms and legs kept jerking spasmodically and her body every now and then moved involuntarily. But in a quarter of an hour she was quite normal again. It is not to be wondered at that the effect of flashlight is severe on a physical medium when a psychic structure emanating from her body is "out" in the stance room. The reader who has carefully followed my experimental work will understand that the structure is built up of matter from the medium's body and that it is really a part of her organism in a very unstable state. It is acutely sensitive to practically all light, except that at the bottom end of the spectrum, and in fact, cannot exist in any light except this. Imagine then the devastating effect of the magnesium flash upon this delicate structure. No wonder the

154 [EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

medium trembles violently and is upset for some little time!

A few mediums of the past have apparently been able to withstand the effects of the magnesium light fairly well. At least no untoward results were reported. But I am satisfied that its use is rather risky for the medium and that it should only be employed after careful thought and preparation and in conjunction with the desires of the operators. For, whether the reader looks upon the operators as the spirit beings they claim to be, or as sub-conscious nuclei belonging to the medium or sitters, it is certain they are in charge of and produce the phenomena, and that, therefore, they may be trusted to know more about the dangers incurred by the medium than the experimenter. Miss Goligher is a young woman and possibly her bodily functions are not yet fully developed, with the consequence that exposure to flashlight during the occurrence of phenomena would be specially injurious to her. At any rate the operators were always careful that nothing should be done which would in any way be likely to harm her. They seemed anxious that photographs of the levitated table and of other psychic phenomena should be secured and we held several sittings for the purpose. But they always demanded that a trial of the flashlight should first be made with the object, apparently, of discovering its

likely effect on the psychic structures and the medium. Usually after that they simply refused to levitate the table again. They spelled out messages to the effect that if, while the table was levitated, the magnesium flash was used, the medium would probably be severely injured. It requires a large and powerful psychic structure to levitate a table, with corresponding drain upon the medium. The structure shown in the photograph (E.P.P., Experiment 87) did not require nearly so much psychic energy and material from the medium's body, as the table was not levitated at the time. It was only a framework compared with the structure necessary during actual levitation. Yet the medium was severely affected by the flash. If a heavily energised structure had been present, it is reasonable to suppose that the medium would have been proportionately affected and that really serious injury might have followed. The experimenter into psychic phenomena of the physical order should always be careful of the health and well-being of his medium. He should remember that he is dealing with processes of the true nature of which he is completely ignorant and that any thoughtlessness on his part is likely to lead to unfortunate results. Moreover, much better experimental work can be done if the medium is treated considerately than if she is looked upon as an insensitive machine. I think that much of

the trouble in the past has arisen from want of consideration for their mediums on the part of experimenters. Psychic work should be a combined affair; the experimenter and the medium should form a partnership, as it were, with the object of obtaining the best results possible.

There is no doubt that the operators at the Goligher circle were desirous that as much photographic work should be done as was consistent with the health of the medium. But unfortunately, it was found that little such work could be accomplished owing to the reasons mentioned. The youth of the medium was, I think, the chief drawback. Five or six years hence it will probably be found that she will not be so acutely sensitive to the magnesium flash as she now is and accordingly photographs of many phases of the phenomena, at present impossible, will be obtained. For my part I state plainly that in matters of this kind I would not go against the advice of the operating entities. I have had such intimate experience of the stance room and its manifestations that I have become systematically careful of the well-being of the medium.

While on the subject of the health of the medium I may mention that when the experiments were being carried out in which she temporarily lost 30, 40, and even 50 lb. in weight (see Experiments 19-23), there was abundant evidence that the strain upon her system was becoming

severe. I felt that it was necessary to be careful and I would not proceed too far. The operators, however, were working in conjunction with me on that occasion and, accordingly, I felt the more confident.

(22) Q. Is it the case, so far as your experience goes, that mediums are hysterical or weakminded?

A. It is difficult to answer this by a direct affirmative or negative. Miss Goligher is an extremely practical and strong-minded young woman. She is not excitable but is placid and cheerful. As I have already mentioned, however, her mediumship has never been pressed. What might happen if she were to sit three or four times a week in promiscuous circles, I would not like to say; but I think there can be little doubt that she would suffer.

Some professional mediums are, I think, not exactly stable. A good many of them are excitable and given to exaggeration. A few are decidedly eccentric. I have never met one whom I would consider weak-minded, but I think, on the whole, their calling is not very suitable for them, either physically or mentally.

(23) Q. Have you had experience of mental phenomena such as trance, clairvoyance, etc.?

A. Yes. I have had considerable experience. Such phenomena do not, however, appeal to me so strongly as the physical. I expect it is a mat-

