EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

by W. J. Crawford, D.Sc. (1880-1920)

Basis: Clean reading edition of W. J. Crawford's Experiments in Psychical Science: Levitation, Contact, and the Direct Voice (New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1919; Internet Archive experimentsinpsy01craw); spelling and wording original; running headers, page numbers and scanner noise removed; the closing List of Experiments table and the Index are not reproduced in this reading edition.

Reader note: Second volume of Crawford's Goligher Circle trilogy: The Reality of Psychic Phenomena (1916, in this series) precedes it, and The Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle (1921, in this series) completes it.

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

Levitation, Contact, and the Direct Voice

BY W. J. CRAWFORD, D.Sc.

Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering, The Municipal Technical Institute, Belfast; Extra-Mural Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering, Queen's University of Belfast. Author of "The Reality of Psychic Phenomena," etc.

New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 681 Fifth Avenue

Copyright, 1919, by E. P. Dutton & Company



Preface

In this work I deal with problems connected with the physical phenomena of spiritualism. I have already examined some of these in The Reality of Psychio Phenomena published two years ago, but in the present yolume I go further into details, I described experiments for the most part of a more difficult and far-reaching nature than those set forth in my former book. In addition, I give the results of tests carried out on "contact" phenomena and on the "direct voice," :

I purpose in the near future to write a volume dealing with the more intimate details of the psychic structures at the Goligher circle.

I think that a series of small works dealing with the results of psychic investigation is preferable to one unwieldy volume containing masses of detail. One needs to take these psychic matters in small doses if they are to have any chance of assimilation.

My purpose in writing these books, is to advance our knowledge of psychic phenomena and the laws underlying them. The actual experimenting has given me great pleasure, though it

has involved the outlay of much time and labour. No one unacquainted with the subject and its peculiar difficulties can adequately appreciate the time and toil required in the preparation of even a small work such as this. The only reward is a mental one and the stimulation comes from one's innate interest in the subject.

I have to thank Mr. S. Stoupe, of the Art Department of the Technical Institute, Belfast, for the valuable help he has given me, especially with regard to photography, and Mr. C. C. Pounder, A.M.I.Mech.E., for his assistance in reading over the manuscript and suggesting alterations and improvements.

I also desire to thank other friends who have helped me in various ways.

In the text of the present work I use the letters R.P.P. when I refer to my former book The Reality of Psychic Phenomena.

W. J. Crawford. Belfast, February, 1919.



Contents

Chapter I. Introductory

Chapter II. New Problems and Experiments on Reaction

Chapter III. Miscellaneous

Chapter IV. Analysis of Results

Chapter V. Questions and Answers

Chapter VI. Contact Phenomena

Chapter VII. Direct Voice Phenomena

Full-page Illustrations: Fig. 7, the table in the experiments (facing p. 29); Fig. 27, the table supported clear of the floor (facing p. 162); Fig. 28, balance with table attached (facing p. 163); Fig. 29, the two trumpets for the direct voice (facing p. 180).



Chapter I. Introductory

Problems which await solution — The Goligher phenomena— What the operators themselves say about the psychic structures.

AiiTHOUGH complete in itself, the present volume is partly a continuation of my previous book, "The Reality of Psychic Phenomena," which I assume the reader has perused. In that book I described a series of experiments carried out with a view of ascertaining the laws governing the lifting of tables at seances. Those experiments dealt, in the main, with phenomena produced at a home-circle in Belfast at which tables and stools and other articles were lifted into the air untouched by any person. I put forward the theory that rod-like structures issued from the body of the medium and effected the levitations. The table movements were execu-

ted under the guidance of invisible "operators" who, under the seance conditions, were able to work in conjunction with the medium.

In this volume the matter is taken further. li deals with experiments carried out by me at Belfast in 1916-1917. The circle referred to as the Goligher circle consists of Miss Kathleen Goligher (the medium), her three sisters, brother, father, and brother-in-law. The terminology employed is the same as that previously used.

Although certain general conclusions were put forward in my previous book, many problems were necessarily left unsolved or were only partly solved. A few such are as follows:

(1) While the table is levitated, what is the ef-

fect of adding weights to it, i.e., of gradually increasing the weight of the levitated body? If the cantilever theory be true, would not the applied moment of the weight at length reach such a magnitude that the medium would topple over in her chair?

(2) When a man presses downwards with great

force upon the levitated table would not the cantilever theory involve the toppling over of the medium?

(3) Is the cantilever theory true for all types of

levitation phenomena or is it only true for a particular case?

(4) What type of psychic mechanism is em-

ployed when the medium's chair (with the medium sitting in it) is bodily moved about the floor of the seance room?

(5) How is it that the medium feels no reaction

effects upon her body?

(6) What type of psychic mechanism is em-

ployed when the table rests on the floor several feet from the medium and a man cannot move it either inwards or outwards, however hard he pushes it towards, or pulls it from the medium?

(7) What is the exact shape of the cantilever

arm which levitates the table?

These are problems upon which I hope to throw some light in this book. The experimental consideration of the more intimate details of the psychic structure is left to another occasion.

In order that the reader may properly focus his attention on the work to follow, let me briefly describe, even at the risk of some slight repetition, the phenomena that occur at an ordinary observational seance with the Goligher circle.

THE GENERAL PHENOMENA

The members constituting the circle enter the room and each sits down on his customary chair. They sit round in the form of a circle about five feet diameter and the table is placed in the centre. The ordinary illuminant is turned off and a

red light turned on. The sitters clasp each other's hands in chain order and the seance commences. One of the members of the circle opens the proceedings with prayer and then a hymn is snng. In a few minutes, sounds — tap, tap, tap, ; — are heard on the floor close to the medium. These are the first "spirit" raps of the evening. They soon become louder and stronger and occur right out in the circle space, on the table, and on the chairs of the sitters. Their magnitude varies in intensity from the slightest audible ticks to blows which might well be produced by a sledge-hammer, the latter really being awe-inspiring and easily heard two stories below and even outside the house. The loud blows perceptibly shake the floor and chairs. Sometimes the raps keep time to hymns sung by the members of the circle ; sometimes they tap out of themselves complicated tunes and dances on top of the table or on the floor. Besides the ordinary raps the operators can produce various modifications and peculiar variations. For instance, they can imitate a bouncing ball so perfectly that one would be prepared to affirm a ball was really in the room. They can imitate to perfection the sawing of the table leg, the striking of a match, the walking of a man, and the trotting of a horse. They give double and treble knocks, i.e., two or three fast ones and one slow one. In fact, almost every variety and combination of rap it is

possible to imagine is heard. I have used the phonograph in the seance room and possess three authentic records of many varieties of the raps. These records I have used while lecturing on this subject. The recorded sounds can easily be heard in a hall holding 500 people.

After a quarter of an hour or so the rapping ceases and another type of phenomenon takes its place. The reader should remember that the members of the circle are simply sitting on their chairs holding each other's hands in chain order and are only passive instruments in the hands of the invisible operators — whoever the latter may be supposed to be. The little table is standing on the floor within the circle formed by the sitters and is not in contact with any of them or with any portion of their clothing. Suddenly the table gives a lurch or moves slightly along the floor. After a while it may give another lurch or it may rise into the air on two legs (two legs being thus in the air and two on the floor) . These movements — which are executed, as I have said, without physical contact with the medium or the members of the circle — are the preliminary motions which usually take place just previous to the first levitation, i.e., before the table rises completely into the air of itself where it remains suspended for several minutes without visible support.

I have seen hundreds of levitations under all

conditions; standard levitations such as that mentioned above, abnormal levitations (such as where a stool rose four feet into the air and moved gently up and down for several minutes while we all examined it closely and while the medium was seated on a weighing machine) and freak levitations (such as where the table, being levitated, rocked in the air just like a small boat tossed about on a choppy sea). I have seen the table turn completely round in the air, and I have seen it levitated upside down and sideways. After the exhibition of levitation ceases, the trumpet phenomena commence. At the beginning of the seance a couple of thin metal cones which fit telescopically into each other and which we will call "trumpets" are fixed together and placed upright on the floor between the medium and her father. The trumpets now begin to straddle over the floor with little leaps and jerks, remaining in a vertical position until they reach the table (now at rest in the centre of the circle) where they fall or are sometimes seemingly pushed over, and are then drawn under the table. A loud shuffling noise is now heard, for the operators are trying to detach the trumpets, a somewhat difficult process as they fit rather tightly together. At length, however, the operators succeed in separating the two pieces, which are soon seen floating in the air, with their ends projecting from under the table. The halves

INTRODUCTORY R6

then beat time to a tune, like the batons of a conductor, after which a visitor is allowed to grasp the end of either and thus "shake hands" with the invisible entities. Sometimes the operators press upwards on the under-surface of the table with one or both of the floating trumpets, thus levitating it. A little handbell is sometimes placed on the floor and this is often lifted and rung. The sound may be clear as though the bell were held by the handle, or dull as though it were held by the metal. Sometimes raps accompany the ringing of the bell. The sitters are occasionally psychically "touched" on various parts of the body.

Towards the end of the seance — about an hour and a half from the opening — the psychic energy available, to use a common term, is at a maximum and great forces are exerted. For instance, although a heavy man sits upon the table it moves about the floor with great ease; or the table being levitated, a strong man pushing from the top cannot depress it to the floor; or the table moves to the side of the circle farthest from the medium and an experimenter is asked to lay hold of it and try to prevent its return to the centre, but he is totally unable to do so; or the table's weight can be temporarily so much increased that it cannot be lifted, or on the other hand so much reduced that it can be raised by an upward force of an ounce or two ; or the table

being turned upside down on the floor cannot be raised by a strong upward pull on the legs, being apparently fastened to the floor.

SOME NEW LEVITATIONS

Besides the ordinary standard type of levitation in which the table rises vertically into the

JLevitated Tabl* Med,um

FLoor .LeveL.

Fig. 1.

air in a normal manner, various modified and peculiar types of the phenomenon have occurred. At a recent seance the table turned over on its side with edge of surface and two legs on the floor, surface remote from medium. Then it levitated in that position (Hg. 1) remaining in the air for about half a minute, with lowest edge about a foot above the floor. The surface (S) was about 4 feet from the body of the medium.

It levitated again in the same way and then turned over in the air, very slowly at first and then jerkily, until its surface was horizontal and it had attained a normal levitated position. Fig. 2 gives successive positions.

Floor Level. Fig. 2.

At subsequent seances the table turned completely over, as above, both broadwise and endwise, i.e., where in the one case AB (fig. 1) represents the short edge, and, in the other case, the long edge of the surface.

While at position (3), i.e., where the table was inclined at about 45° to the floor, the operators seemed to experience the greatest difficulty in the carrying out of this phenomenon. They seemed to have no trouble in levitating the table as at (1), and in turning it over in the air to about position (3), but a halt always occurred at (3). Sometimes, even, the table dropped there, the completed phenomenon evidently being impossible despite the almost frantic efforts of the opera-

tors. At other times, after a brief halt and various shakings and jerkings in the air, the table was turned over into positions (4) and (5). At the critical point (3) sounds were often heard on the surface and legs of the table, as though suckers were slipping over the wood, or were being forced off, or were taking new grips. There could be no mistaking these sounds, for they made quite an audible swish. On one or two occasions the table suddenly dropped 6 inches or so in the air, and simultaneously there was heard the swishing noise, the inference being that a sucker had been torn from its grip. The operators themselves say that during these abnormal levitations they have several psychic rods projecting from the medium simultaneously, and that they grip the surface, the legs, and the cross-bars (if the table possesses them) with the ends of these rods, which resemble straight aims having the power to take a suction grip on wooden surfaces with their free extremities. Up to position (3) (fig. 2) it is easily understandable that the rods could fairly easily grip the legs or under-surface of the table (perhaps three rods being in operation at once) and turn the table partly over as shown; but about position (3) there would have to be a new disposition of the rods; or one or more of them would have to let go and take a grip on another part of the table;

or owing to the awkward position reached, some of the rods would have too much stress upon them and would be likely to slip (as seems actually to occur, if we may judge by the sounds heard) ; and in general, new arrangements would have to be made. Imagine a man sitting in the medium's chair and, instead of his two arms, to possess three or four unjointed rods which he

Floor L.EVEL.

Fig. 3.

can move up and down and to and fro, which he can shorten and lengthen but which he cannot bend, and with the ends of which he can take a suction grip on various parts of the table, and we have a fairly good idea of what is taking place during the occurrence of the phenomenon.

The psychic rods are usually quite invisible.

Abnormal levitations (in each case lasting for a minute or longer, not merely transitory) have also occurred as in Fig. 3, where the table remained in the air inclined as shown, with legs

towards medium, and as in Fig. 4, where the legs were directed away from the medium.

Floor Leve:U

Fig. 4.

THE SHAPE OF THE LEVITATING CANTILEVER ACv CORDING TO THE OPERATORS

The shape of the cantilever at the end of my first series of experiments was comparatively doubtful. I took it to be roughly as follows (see Figure 5 on the following page) : — Here M is the medium, T the levitated table and AB the levitating cantilever, the last consisting of two main portions, A, an arm springing from the medium, and B, a vertical column continuous with the arm pressing upwards on the under-surface of the table. I have since taken the opportunity thoroughly to question the operators as to its shape. A seance was held at my own house and replies to questions were given by means of raps, blows, shufflings on the floor, etc. The following was the code —

INTRODUCTORY

Three raps meant "Yes,"

One rap meant "No,"

Two raps meant "Doubtful."

A continuous series of raps meant that the operators wished to say something on their own account, i.e., they wished the alphabet spelt out

FLoor Level..? Fig. 5.

to them so that they could interpolate a word or a short sentence.

A long scraping sound on the floor meant that my supposition (on which I was basing the question) was not quite correct although it contained some elements of the truth.

A great many emotions such as joy, sorrow, agreement, disagreement, fun, friendliness, anger, etc., were often also indicated by the various styles of rapping. For instance, loud emphatic

blows in answer to a question indicated (according to their number) strong agreement or disagreement; or if a lot of questions were asked, none of which would seem to hit the exact truth, and a final question apparently did actually strike it, there was a little fusillade of raps indicating that the correct solution had at last been reached. Sometimes the operators seemed so pleased at my guessing something correctly that they suddenly rapped out a lively little tune on the floor.

The reader should understand that the following description of the levitating structure is given by the operators and that I am not responsible for it and do not attach undue importance to it. Nevertheless it has its points of interest and I think should be included.

With regard to the dimensions of the cantilever structure, I first asked the operators if they understood what a "cross-section" was. They answered "No." Then I went on as follows:

Q. Do you know the meaning of the words "diameter" or "thickness"?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know the magnitude of the dimension we call an inch?

A. Yes.

When I asked them to rap out the number of inches in a certain part of the structure they

INTRODUCTORY

usually hesitated for a little as though thinking the matter over, and then rapped out the number decisively and firmly.

According to the operators the dimensions and shape of a normal levitating cantilever are as shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6.

B.

The top of the columnar part of the cantilever is spread out into a broad flat surface of area approximating to the undersurface of the table. In other words the head of the cantilever is shaped like a mushroom and even bears some analogy to that boy's plaything known as a sucker.

A fairly uniform vertical column of diameter about 4 inches. At K the cantilever changes its direction from vertical to

more or less horizontal. At K the structure is 3 or 4 inches above the floor. C. Just before entering the body of the medium the rod widens to a diameter of about 7 inches. The rod does not branch out like the roots of a tree where it enters the body of the medium, but goes in undivided. I had thought it possible that the fixed end of the cantilever (i.e., the end fixed to the body of the medium) might spread out into a large number of little rootlets (see R.P.P. ch. xiii), but the operators were most emphatic that it does not, but goes in solid, although its diameter increases (from 4 inches to 7 inches). The diameter given for the greater part of the structure, viz., 4 inches, agrees approximately with the diameter of the vertical and arched columns seen in the photograph (see R.P.P. ch. xii).

It is to be remembered that the whole structure is generally quite invisible to any one with normal eyesight. The operators always said, however, that under certain conditions certain people who are not clairvoyants would be able to see it, and this statement of theirs has lately proved to be true. I will deal with this point in a later volume.

WHAT THE OPERATORS SAY OP THE RAPPING RODS

The theory for rapping developed in my former book is that a psychic "rod" issues from the

body of the medium; a semi-flexible rod, which is moved up and down and strikes the floor or table. The operators say that the rod theory considered generally is correct. They say that raps are produced in two ways :

(1) Soft raps, bouncing ball imitation, etc., —

by beating the side of the rod on the floor, as one uses a stick for beating a carpet.

(2) Hard raps — by beating the rod on the floor

more or less axially.

While I was obtaining this explanation from them, they illustrated the various styles of raps under consideration at the moment by actually rapping on the floor.

I asked them the approximate dimensions of a rapping rod used to give a fairly hard blow. They gave a blow on the floor as a sample and then said that the diameter of rod used in that particular case was about 2 inches and of uniform thickness over its length, until just before entering the body of the medium where it increased to a diameter of about 3 inches.

The operators also said that the same rod could be used to make a variety of raps according to the strength with which it was struck on the floor. They illustrated this statement by producing (they said with the same rod) a quick variety of raps, as follows: (1) Light taps, as though a lead pencil were striking the floort

(2) Light bouncing ball imitation, and

(3) Hard blows.

These three different raps were used at this time to reply to questions requiring an affirmative answer, i.e., if the operators wished to say "Yes" they gave the three raps (1), (2), (3) above, all different, in succession; a rather interesting development.



Chapter II. New Problems and Experiments on Reaction

Capsizing of medium and her chair during levitation — The two kinds of levitating structure — Effect on weight of medium when experimenter presses downwards on levitated table — Levitation over spring balance — Upside down levitation — Effect on medium when table's weight is increased — Relation between increased weight of table and loss of weight of medium — Bicycle tests — Psychic structure used when table is pushed inwards strongly towards medium — Direct downward push on spring balance — Psychic mechanism used when medium and her chair are pushed along the floor — Matter abstracted from the body of the medium.

In my former book, as I have already said, many problems were left unsolved with regard to mechanical reaction during the phenomenon of levitation of the table. I am now going to describe experiments carried out for the purpose of solving some of these and of clearing up points which were left in a doubtful state. As an introduction to this part of my subject the following article, reprinted from "The Interna-

tional Psychic Gazette" of September, 1916, will be found useful:

"During a recent series of experiments upon table levitations, rapping, and allied phenomena, I had occasion to examine pretty carefully the reaction upon the medium, for upon the extent and character of the reaction depends the ability to form a satisfactory theory.

"In this article I wish to give the results of late observations upon the character of the reaction, and to state as clearly as I can the points with regard to it which are definite and fixed, and those which are still more or less indefinite and, indeed, mysterious.

"It is well to examine as minutely as possible the case of a table steadily levitated a foot or so in the air; that is to say, a table which, so far as observation goes, is apparently at rest in the air in front of the medium, and is not perceptibly oscillating to and fro, or up and down. I had better say here that I have never witnessed an absolutely immobile levitation, for close observation always shows that there are minute tremors and movements; but in good examples of the phenomenon these are so small as to be practically negligible.

"Of course, the reader is to understand that neither the medium nor members of the circle are touching, or in contact with the table in any way. They have either their hands joined in

chain order, and feet firmly on floor, or hands on knees for experimental observations. The diameter of the circle is about 5 feet, with the table in the middle. I have seen many hundreds of levitations under all conditions.

"Supposing, therefore, that the table is steadily levitated, what have I found occurs to the medium? First of all, and most important, between 95 per cent, and 100 per cent, of the weight of the table is added to the normal weight of the medium ; i.e., for all practical purposes of calculation the effect is the same as though the table were resting upon her head, or as though she was holding it up with her hands. Experiment, moreover, indicates where the slight difference lies. For there is also a slight reaction, not more than 5 per cent, of the weight of the table, upon the members of the circle (six in number) other than the medium; so that it is probably correct to say that the effect is exactly the same as though the table were lifted and held at rest in the air by the medium herself aided very slightly by the help that could be supplied by, say, the use of a finger on the part of each member of the circle.

"The important fact, however, is that during all the experiments I carried out, nearly all the weight of the levitated table was, during the period of the phenomenon, added to the weight of the medium. My heaviest experimental table

was a little over 10 lb., and the lightest slightlyless than 3 lb., so that great weights were not involved. We therefore arrive at the law for this circle: — During levitation of light bodies the weight of the levitated body is practically added to the weight of the medium. This, so far as I am concerned, is definite, and admits of no doubt whatever.

"But now we come to more troublesome considerations. What is the effect of the added 10 lb. (for the heaviest table) on the organism of the medium? Is she conscious of anything in the nature of stress on her body? Is the reaction local or diffused?

"In the first place, during levitations at circles held up to about nine months ago, the muscles of her arms from shoulder to wrist were absolutely rigid and hard — indeed, during high levitations they were iron-like in their stiffness. She also experienced a stiffness all over her body, but not to the same extent as in her arms. The bend of the arm was chiefly affected, as well as the muscles at the ankles. Gradually, however, during late months this muscular rigidity during levitation, has been dying away, as I have myself observed ; until, during the last few seances, as I am informed by the director of the circle, it is no longer perceptible.

"Miss Goligher (the medium), who is a highly intelligent young lady, tells me that she experi-

ences(£ow)no sensation whatever during the occurrence of phenomena. What has happened in the interval of nine months to cause this change? Mas there been a corresponding fundamental change in the character of the phenomena? Not so. The phenomena are of the same type and as powerful as ever.

"At any rate the medium insists that she feels nothing whatever during phenomena, yet I know there is an added weight upon her of about 10 lb. when the table is levitated. The question to consider is why she does not feel this weight ; why she experiences no inconvenience of any kind.

"The change in the character of the muscular stress experienced by the medium may perhaps be assumed to be due to the reaction nowadays being more evenly spread over her body than was formerly the case. From being a localised reaction it is now becoming a diffused one. In other words, the magnitude of the reaction per square inch of her body is relatively small and escapes notice.

"But such an attempt at explanation can only contain a small part of the truth. It might suffice if the total reaction never amounted to more than 10 lb. or so, but, as a matter of fact, it is often greatly in excess of this, as, for instance, when a table being levitated, a man presses down on the top of it in an endeavour to depress it to

the floor. Allowing 30 lb. for the muscular pressure of the man and 10 lb. for the weight of the table, we have a reaction on the medium of 40 lb. ; and there are many other cases which I have not space to enumerate, in which the total reaction on her body must amount to at least half a hundredweight. Even if such a reaction were diffused (and this is at any rate not always the case) one would think it would be bound to cause physical inconvenience to the medium; and especially would this be so if the reaction were of a variable and impacting nature as is often the case.

"I am now going to offer a hypothesis to account for the insensibility that the medium has always more or less displayed to these reaction forces (though this insensibility is at a maximum nowadays, as I have explained) — a theory which I feel sure has at any rate something in it. It may be stated thus: During__the. ppmrrpTirp. nf phenomena the medium, although her_ brain-is. practicallynormal, has a jpeculiar state of insensibility upon her body, allied to the similar state *that janbe produced by hypnosis. This peculiar condition is induced, I think, of set purpose by the operators, in order to render her insensitive to the various mechanical actions which have their focus on her body. That something like this really occurs is rendered likely by an incident which took place at the circle. The medium

was entranced (not for physical phenomena, during which she is always normal) and the control said he was going to show the sitters an experiment on the insensibility to pain he could induce. The medium had a painful and unhealed burn on one of her elbows, but notwithstanding this she beat both elbows with some force on the arms of her chair — and seemed to enjoy it. She felt no pain whatever when she awoke from trance.

"A similar case occurs to me concerning another medium in England. A friend in whom I place implicit confidence tells me that he has seen several men sitting on top of a heavy dining table, which rose on two legs. The medium then placed one of his feet under one of the raised legs of the table which proceeded to pound his foot with tremendous force — with a force which could not have failed to break the bones of a normal foot. Yet the medium's foot was quite uninjured and he suffered no pain then or afterwards.

"Thus it seems likely that the want of sensibility to heavy and varied reactions which undoubtedly occur upon the medium is due to some peculiar condition of her organism during the period of phenomena.

"This is also borne out by the reaction effects of heavy raps or blows on the floor. The medium tells me — and there is no doubt she speaks ab-

solute truth — that she is totally unaware of any movements of her body while such blows are occurring. Yet such reactionary motions sometimes do occur. They don't always occur, and the fact that they don't is one of the mysteries of this kind of phenomena. But I have watched her sitting quietly on a chair in my own house with the red light shining directly on her white blouse, while great sledge-hammer blows have been occurring on the floor several feet in front of her at intervals of a few seconds ; and as each blow was struck I have watched her whole body from the waist upwards sway backwards several inches. The blows then became lighter and swifter, and with the change the character of the reaction shocks also changed, becoming also lighter and swifter — and finally when a regular fusillade of raps was being produced, she wTas under a regular bombardment. I went over beside her and felt the various motions of her body. Yet she is unconscious of them, although quite mentally alert. These slight motions are all that occur while phenomena are in operation. During levitations lasting up to five minutes she sits on her chair as firm as a rock.

"A matter that I had perhaps better mention, is the danger that an unobservant and unscientific witness of the rapping phenomena might uncritically conclude that the various slight motions of the medium's body, referred to above,

betokened conscious or unconscious fraud on her part. I need not labour the point with regard to Miss Goligher, but I am afraid other mediums may have thereby suffered in the past. Such movements and body stresses are what we should expect, and I for one, knowing what I do about physical phenomena, would be surprised to see them entirely absent. For the whole of such phenomena — I refer to levitations, rappings, movement of furniture, etc., are purely mechanical operations and must, therefore, obey the laws of mechanics."

A matter that caused much comment and discussion was the fact, that during levitation of the table, the medium had never manifested any tendency to overturn. It is obvious that if the cantilever theory be true, there is a fairly large turning moment upon the medium even when the table itself is the only body levitated, i.e., without additional weights; while, if a man presses vertically downwards with considerable force upon the levitated table, the turning moment is greatly increased; yet the medium had never shown the slightest tendency to topple over.

The table usually levitates with its centre about 2y2 feet from her trunk; hence, with a downward force of, say, 50 lb. the capsizing moment is 125 lb.-ft. which, to say the least of it, is fairly large and should, one would think, cause

physical inconvenience to the medium. But it is not so. The medium tells me she feels nothing at all.

During ordinary demonstration seances (in contradistinction to experimental ones) she sits on a fairly large wooden chair having wooden arm rests on either side, i.e., her chair is somewhat heavier and more massive than the chairs of the other sitters. It can be shown that her own weight and the weight of her chair, together with the pressure of her feet on the floor, were sufficient to counterbalance the greatest turning moment which had so far been applied during ordinary table levitations.

Experiment 1 : Capsizing moment on medium.

I therefore determined to place the medium on a weighing machine, and, gradually increasing the weight of the levitated body, to take the reaction upon her for each weight and observe what would happen. Neither the medium nor any of the members of the circle suspected my real intention, viz., to see if a turning moment would be reached sufficiently great to pull the medium off the machine.

Apparatus. — A small platform weighing machine reading to 8 cwt., and marked to 2 oz., a half imperial size drawing board (covered with

Fig. 7

a piece of dark cloth) placed on the platform of the machine to increase slightly its area.

Method. — The medium vacated her usual chair, and sat on an ordinary small-sized chair, placed on the platform of the weighing machine. Her hands were on her knees and she was isolated from everybody. The height of the platform above the floor of the room was 7% inches. Conditions were exactly similar to those described in Chapter 3, E.P.P.

I first took the reaction on the medium for the weight of levitated table alone, and then I placed on the surface of the table a circular 10 lb. iron weight, obtained the reaction for that, added another 10 lb. weight and so on. The table rested on the floor between each levitation.

Note. — Several different tables were used during the experiments described in this book. Sometimes for purposes of certain tests, alterations were made to some of these tables which affected their weights a little ; but in every case I give the weight of the particular table used for a given experiment. I finally constructed the table shown in Fig. 7. This had no crossbars connecting the legs, and nails, screws, etc., were eliminated as far as possible. Its dimensions were as follows:

Length, 22 inches. Width, 19% inches.

Height, 28 inches. Weight, 12% lb.

Data:

Weight of table in this test = 8 lb. 1 oz.

Weight of medium + her chair

+ drawing board = 135 lb. 8 oz.

The following were the results:

Weight of levitated body

Reaction on the medium due to the levitation

8 lb. 1 oz. (table only)

18 lb. 1 oz. (table + 10-lb. wt.) . . 28 lb. 1 oz. (table + 20-lb. wt.) . .

8 lb .12 oz. 19 1b. 29 1b.

The weighing machine was not qnite so sensitive as that used in the first research, but it was quite good enough for the work in hand. Kesults may be considered accurate to % lb. either way. Of course any slight movement of the levitated body in the air affects, to some extent, the value of the reaction on the medium, and it is quite impossible to obtain absolutely steady levitation.

For the first case given in the above tabulation, i.e., where the table was levitated without additional weights, there were in reality two values for the reaction on the medium: (1) when the table was levitated only about 4 inches in the air the reaction was 10 lb. 14 oz., (2) when the table rose to about the level of the medium's

knees, the reaction of 8 lb. 12 oz. was obtained and this was the minimum and steady value.

Up to a total levitated weight of 28 lb. the medium felt nothing, and she had no tendency to overturn; but when I placed the third 10 lb. weight on the table, making altogether a total load of 38 lb., and the table levitated for an instant, the medium's feet, wThich were firmly planted on the weighing machine, slipped away from under her. She said she was moving forward and could not help herself. The table remained up only for an instant. I made the medium place her feet as far back as possible on the machine, but during the next attempt by the operators at levitation, her whole trunk swung forward and the table dropped. It was obvious that during the phenomenon her body was being pulled forward. I told her to grip the back rail of the weighing machine with both hands to see if this would prevent her being carried away; but during the next attempt at levitation under these conditions the whole platform of the machine with medium on it tilted over, as far as it could go, in a forward direction.

Finally, seeing that there was no doubt whatever that the machine was tending to overturn, I got the medium's father (who sits on her left) and her brother-in-law (who sits on her right) each to press back on one of her shoulders, while

she herself gripped tightly the back-rail of the machine, and placed her feet as far back on the platform as she could. We then obtained a levitation lasting for about 10 seconds.

Weight of levitated body

Reaction on the medium due to the levitation

38 lb. 1 oz. (table + 30-lb. wt.) . .

44 lb. 8 oz.

It is to be remembered that in this case the medium was not isolated, but had her shoulders held back by two of the sitters as explained above, so that the 44 lb. 8 oz. is not due to the weight of the levitated body alone, but is accounted for in part by muscular pressure.

The main and important result of this experiment is that for the first time a capsizing moment was observed on the medium, due to the levitated body.

During the actions which were occurring upon her, the medium felt no kind of pressure upon any part of her body. It is correct to say, that she felt nothing at all, except an irresistible impulse to move off the weighing machine. She described the feeling as similar to that felt if she were sitting on a see-saw, the end of which rose and impelled her forward.

Experiment 2: Observations on the capsizing effect on the medium during levitation when she sits on her ordinary chair placed on the floor.

The medium sat on her usual chair, which was standing on the floor, i.e., the chair was not placed on the platform of the weighing machine. She sat perfectly still with her hands on her knees, and was thus isolated from all the members of the circle. I asked her to remain quite passive and to report her sensations to me.

The weight of the table was 7 lb. 14 oz.

While the table was levitated I placed three 10-lb. weights upon it in succession, making a total levitated load of 37 lb. 14 oz. The table did not descend to the floor between the loadings to allow me to put on the additional weights (as in Experiment 1) but remained up the whole time.

Up to a total levitated weight of 37 lb. 14 oz. there was no very pronounced effect on the medium. Her trunk, however, swung gently forward with the heavier weights and she said she felt herself being urged forward, though she felt no kind of mechanical pressure on her body.

I then increased the weights on the levitated table two pounds at a time up to 36 lb. (total weight including the table 43 lb. 14 oz.). Sev-

eral times did the medium's body then swing strongly forward, npon which the table dropped. I, therefore, told her to hold on with her hands to the arms of her chair. I placed an additional 4-lb. weight on the table (total including the table of 47 lb. 14 oz.). When the table levitated the medium's chair tilted forward on its two front legs and the table dropped.

As this dead weight of about 48 lb. seemed to be near the limit for this sort of levitation, I removed the weights. The table then levitated alone and I pressed downwards with considerable force upon it.

On some occasions (I made the experiment many times) while I was pressing strongly downwards, the medium's body tilted forward and on other occasions it did not. She told me that when she did not move forward, she felt no inclination to tilt at all, and when she did move forward, she simply could not help herself, although she felt no mechanical pressure on her body. This alternative tilting and non-tilting of the medium's body (the two phases occurred in alterations with succeeding levitations) took place so often that I suspected the operators were trying to bring something to my notice, so I asked them if the levitating structure was sometimes a true cantilever, i.e., no part of it touching the floor, and sometimes not a, true cantilever, i.e., with the free end resting on the

floor under the table. They vigorously assented to this and demonstrated for my benefit. I said, "I want you to levitate the table with a true cantilever and I will press down hard on the table." They immediately produced levitation and I found that on all occasions of making the proviso about the structure being a true cantilever the medium felt an inclination to overturn and her body swung forward. I then said, "Levitate the table not with a true cantilever, but let the end of it rest on the floor immediately under the table, so that the column forms a kind of prop between table and floor" (see figs. 8 and 9) . They then produced levitation, and on all such occasions of the phenomenon under this proviso the medium felt no inclination to overturn when I pressed down vigorously, and her body was not moved.

The operators say that at demonstration seances they rest the end of the cantilever upon the floor immediately under the table, so that when a strong man stands over the levitated table, and exerts great pressure upon it, the medium is protected from the large reaction forces, the latter in this case being on the floor instead of on her body.

The operators also say, that they much prefer to work with a true cantilever, for, when they have to rest the end of it upon the floor* the

structure is badly strained and much energy is required to maintain its rigidity.

Therefore, for all moderate weights, say up to about 30 lb., a true cantilever is employed, and for greater and variable forces, a supported

Fig. 8. Fig. 9.

cantilever. Figs. 8 and 9 show the two processes diagrammatically.

Experiment 3 : Effect of base of cantilever column resting on pressure recorder.

Proof of the operators' statement given in Experiment 2 that they can rest the bottom end of the columnar part of the cantilever upon the floor under the table and thus throw most of the reaction upon the floor, instead of upon the medium, when large forces are involved.

The weight of the table used was 12*4 lb.

I got a pressure recording apparatus constructed, shown diagrammatically in Fig. 10 which is an end elevation.

A and B are two thin pieces of wood each about 4 inches square. The top piece A can

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

n

Eig. 10.

move up and down on four vertical pins, two of which are shown at E and F, against the pressure of light springs. Two pieces of brass 0 and D, shaped as shown, are fixed to A and B respectively and are placed in an electric bell circuit. The consequence is, that when a downward force is exerted on A, the contacts C and D come together and the bell rings.

I said to the operators, "You say that you have two methods of using the cantilever, (1) where you do not allow it to touch the floor and (2) where you let the bottom of the column touch the floor in order that the floor may take up some of the reaction and thus protect the medium, especially when a man stands over the table and uses great muscular force. I wish to test this statement of yours."

I placed the pressure tester on the floor under the table. The height of the tester was about 2 inches. The medium was seated on the weighing machine. I told the operators to levitate the table with a true cantilever. The table levitated, during which the bell did not ring.

Weight of medium + chair + board

before levitation = 138 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

during steady levitation = 150 lb. 4 oz.

Increase in weight of medium due to

levitation of table = 11 lb. 12 oz.

Weight of table = 121b. 4 oz.

The two facts that the bell did not ring and that the reaction on the medium was approximately equal to the weight of the table, show that the levitating structure must have been an unsupported cantilever.

I then said to the operators, "I wish you to show me the second method of levitation. Please levitate the table so that the bottom end of the column part of the levitating cantilever rests on the pressure recorder (it was on the floor under the table) all the time the table is in the air."

Result. — After one or two futile attempts the levitation was several times accomplished. The bell always rang several seconds before levitation occurred, as though the preliminary process was the firm anchoring of the bottom of the column to the pressure recorder on the floor. While the bell was continuously ringing and the table was steadily levitated, I took the medium's weight.

Weight of medium + chair + board s

before levitation = 138 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium -f- chair + board

during levitation = 135 lb. 8 oz.

Decrease in medium's weight due to levitation = 3 lb.

Weight of table = 12M lb.

Thus it will be seen that the statement of the operators was correct. It is now obvious that when a strong man stands over the levitated table and presses down on it and pushes it about, that the reaction is taken on the floor. As already stated, however, the operators for some reason or other dislike this method and always use an unsupported cantilever where possible.

Experiment 4: Impression on modeller's clay of bottom of cantilever column.

I brought a little box filled with soft clay to the seance room, and said to the operators, "You remember some time ago when we were investigating the methods by which you levitate the table, I found that if necessary you could levitate it by putting the bottom end of the columnar part of the cantilever on the floor immediately under the table, so that it forms a kind of prop?" (See Experiment 2.) Answer — "Yes." "Well, I am going to place this box of soft clay under the table and I want you to levitate the table by this method — only, instead of the bottom end of the columnar part of the cantilever pressing on the floor, I wish it to press on the clay ; i. e., I wish an impression on the clay of the bottom end of the column." The operators said they would try to do what I desired. I placed the box of clay immediately under the table and

waited. In a very short time the table levitated immediately above the clay, the levitation lasting about a dozen seconds. At its conclusion I examined the clay. There was a large irregularly shaped impression on it, the length one way being about 3 inches and the other 2% inches. A number of such impressions will be examined in detail in a later book dealing with the structures.

Experiment 5 : Effect on medium's weight when experimenter presses downwards on levitated table.

I had often wished to discover experimentally the effect on the medium's weight when an experimenter stood over the levitated table and pressed downwards on it — not that I had much doubt as to the result, for I considered that muscular downward pressure was simply equivalent to increasing the table's weight.

My wife having entered the circle, I asked the operators to levitate the table, which they did. I then told my wife to grasp the ends of the table and to press downwards uniformly and without jerks.

Data:

Weight of table = 8 lb. 1 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board before test = 135 lb. 8 oz.

While my wife was pressing downwards as uniformly as possible on the levitated table, the weight of the medium + chair + board rose to, and kept fairly steady at, 155 lb. Increase in medium's weight due to muscular downward pressure on top of the levitated table and to the weight of the table itself = 155 lb. — 135 lb. 8 oz., = 19 lb. 8 oz.

Subtracting the weight of the table (8 lb. 1 oz.) it is seen the muscular pressure exerted was probably 11 lb. 7 oz.

In this case it is obvious that a simple cantilever was used — the method preferred by the operators whenever possible. The total levitated weight would require to be considerably greater than 19 lb. 8 oz. in order to cause the medium to topple over (see Experiment 1).

Experiment 6: Effect on medium's weight when the base of the cantilever rests on the scalepan of a spring balance under the levitated table.

In E.P.P., Experiment 55, I have stated that I carried out an incomplete test with the medium sitting on a weighing machine and a compression balance at the same time below the levitated table.

I showed that while the table was levitated there was a large downward force (in compari-

son with the weight of the table) upon the balance. I asked the operators to drop the table suddenly, and upon this being done, the downward force on the balance instantly disappeared. Four seconds afterwards (or thereabouts) the steelyard of the weighing machine was heard to click against the stop and it was assumed that during the levitation, in addition to a downward force on the compression balance, there was also increased weight on the medium. The experiment was very incomplete and I had not an opportunity at the time of carrying it out thoroughly.

Certain data obtained in later experiments made me doubt the truth of the assumption that during the time there was pressure on the compression balance below the table, there was also increased weight on the medium. On further consideration I thought that this increase may have been due to a momentary jerk of the steelyard at the instant the table dropped and may not have been continuous over the period of the phenomenon. I therefore decided to investigate the point.

Fig. 11 gives a diagrammatic view of the apparatus used. W is the weighing machine, M the medium, T the levitated table, B the compression spring balance, C a metal clip fixed to the edge of the dial, P the pointer, and S,S, insulated wires (one fixed to the clip on the dial

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

W

Fig. 11.

and the other to the centre of the pointer). The clip was insulated from the dial by pieces of brown paper. The idea was that when the pointer moved round sufficiently to touch the clip, an electric bell in the circuit would ring. Full details of a similar arrangement are given in R.P.P., ch. vii. I set the clip so that the bell would ring when there was a weight in the scalepan of just about 19 lb.

Weight of table = 7 lb. 14 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

before test = 135 lb. 8 oz.

During steady levitation above the

balance, with the bell vigorously

ringing, the weight of medium +

chair + board = 122 lb. 12 oz.

Decrease in medium's weight during

levitation = 12 lb. 12 oz.

It is therefore seen that the assumption derived from the unfinished Experiment 55, R.P.P., was wrong and that the increase in weight then noted was probably due to a "kick" of the steelyard owing to the sudden drop of the table. On

this occasion I took care to have the table descend gently and almost imperceptibly to the floor.

Note. — The scalepan was pressing vertically upwards on the end of the cantilever with a pressure somewhat greater than 19 lb. (the apparatus was set at 19 lb.? so that good electric contact would be made and the bell ring vigorously) but judging from the experiments described in E.P.P. the magnitude of this upward pressure would be in the neighbourhood of 21 or 22 lb. The downward weight of the table on the end of the cantilever was approximately 8 lb., so that there was probably a net upward force on the end of the cantilever of between 13 and 14 lb. The diminution in weight of the medium of 12% lb. seems suspiciously close to this.

Experiment 7: Effect on medium's weight when the base of the cantilever rests on the scalepan of a spring balance under the levitated table.

The medium was seated on the weighing machine and a compression balance was placed under the table. I wished to take simultaneous readings of the medium's decrease of weight and the reading on the balance during levitation above the balance.

The weight of the table used was 7 lb. 14 oz.

In the first place, during levitation of the table I took the reading on the balance. It was 12% lb. (practically the same for two levitations). I then went over to the weighing machine and said to the operators, "During the next levitation, I wish you to put the same pressure on the balance as you had on it when I was reading it just now." They said they understood what I meant, and would do what I asked.

The table then levitated and I took the medium's weight.

Weight of medium + chair + board

before levitation = 138 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

during levitation = 137 lb. 14 oz.

Decrease in weight of medium due to

levitation = 10 oz.

It is obvious that there is no certainty that the reading on the balance while the table was levitated the second time was the same as when I read it. There may have been a few pounds difference.

Experiment 8: Effect on medium's weight when the base of the cantilever rests on the scalepan of a spring balance under the levitated table.

Medium on weighing machine and compression balance below table. In this experiment

my wife took the reading on the balance during levitation, while I simultaneously took the weight of the medium.

The weight of the table used was 8 lb. (approx.).

Test A:

Reading on balance = 23% lb.

Reading on weighing machine = 124 lb.

Decrease in medium's weight = 1383^ lb.

- 124 lb = U% lb.

Reading on balance — weight of table =

23% - 8 = 15M lb.

TestB:

Reading on balance = 20 lb.

Reading on weighing machine = 124 lb.

Decrease in medium's weight = 1383^ lb.

- 124 lb = 14^ lb.

Reading on balance — weight of table =

20-8 = 12 lb.

TestG:

Reading on balance = 22 lb.

Reading on weighing machine = 11934 lb.

Decrease in medium's weight = 1343^ lb.

- 11934 lb = 15M lb.

Reading on balance — weight of table =

22-8 = 14 lb.

The results may be considered correct within a pound or so either way. I think the three tests show pretty conclusively that the pressure on balance minus weight of table equals decrease of medium's weight.

It is to be noted that the pressure on the balance is not always the same for the same relative position of table and medium (see Experiments 6, 7, and 8). This is probably due to the fact that the cantilever may issue from the medium's body at various heights.

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION] 47

The results of these experiments are very satisfactory as they solve several troublesome points. They indicate —

(1) That the cantilever theory is correct so far

as it goes.

(2) That the cantilever method of levitation is

but one method (though the most frequent one) for levitating bodies.

(3) That for heavy bodies whose levitation

would cause the medium to capsize, the levitating structure rests on or grips the floor underneath the levitated body or between it and the medium.

In my first series of experiments I have already said that no reaction was ever discovered on the floor, and that the levitated bodies were light ones. Accordingly it was assumed that a cantilever was always used. It may be just possible that the operators experimented in this simple way, so that I would not become involved with a mass of data which could not be classified, i. e., they used their simplest structure so that I could advance gradually and regularly.

I now return to Experiment 2 in which at a total levitated weight of about 48 lb. the medium's chair (on which she was sitting) tilted forward on its two front legs (fig. 12).

The dimensions of the seat of the medium's chair were approximately 17 ins. by 17 ins.

The distance of the centre of levitated table

from centre of front legs of medium's chair was approximately 21 inches.

The weight of the medium -f- chair was approximately 130 lb.

The moment of the levitated weight about the front legs of chair was 48 X 21 ,= 1008 lb.-in.

Floors LeveL.

Pig. 12.

The breadth of the medium's chair was 17 inches. It is somewhat difficult to say exactly where the centre of gravity of medium and chair would be, but it would certainly be a greater distance than half way along the seat. Supposing that the C.G. was 10 in. from front legs, we have the moment of weight of medium + chair about the front legs 130X10 = 1300 lb.-in.

The values of these two moments are sufficiently close to support the theory that a cantilever was in this case used to levitate the table.

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

THE MECHANICS OF THE PHENOMENA CASE I

A force W acting as shown at the end of a cantilever. M, medium; S, weighing maehine.

W

Fig. 13.

The weighing machine will indicate increased weight = W

This is the case which occurs when light articles are levitated.

case n

Two oppositely directed forces acting as shown at the end of the cantilever.

f

Fig. 14.

•(b) If P is greater than W the weighing machine will indicate increased weight = W — P.

(b) If P is greater than W the weighing machine will indicate decreased weight = P — W.

Fig. 15.

This (b) is what occnrs when the psychic cantilever rests on top of the spring balance (see Experiments 7 and 8).

case ni

When the cantilever presses downwards on the floor with a vertical force W? the weighing machine will indicate decreased weight = W.

This is the case that occurs when the table rests on the floor either upright or upside down and its weight is psychically increased. (See Experiments 10 and 11.)

Experiment 9: Upside-down levitation of the table.

If the table is placed upside down on the floor, the operators are unable to levitate it directly, i. e., they cannot raise it straight upwards into the air. They have to tilt one end of it at a considerable angle, evidently for the purpose of getting their levitating structure under the surface, and such a levitation is extremely difficult and rare.

Seeing that a vertical rise from the floor was impossible, we thought of holding the table a foot or so in the air in an inverted position, to see if the operators could get their structure under it, and, providing they could do so, keep the table levitated upside down. Accordingly, the table was lifted and held by the legs about twelve inches above the floor, when the operators immediately pressed upwards upon the inverted surface and evidently tried to grip it. It was obvious they were experiencing trouble in getting a proper balance. In a short time they were successful, for on the legs of the table being released, the table remained levitated upside down; this occurring on two occasions, the last levitation enduring for about a minute.

The table was not simply supported by an upward force on its surface ; it was gripped. This

was apparent when the experimenter pushed over on the legs during the levitation, for a fairly strong resistance was encountered.

The fact that before a direct upside down levitation can occur from the floor, the table has to be held off the floor is very strong presumptive evidence that space is required to get the levitating structure under the surface, and hence that the structure is a real physical entity.

The difficulty of obtaining a balance, referred to above, was evidently due to the centre of gravity of the inverted table being above the surface, i. e., above the place where the levitating force was applied.

EXPERIMENTS ON INCREASED WEIGHT OF TABLE DUE TO PSYCHIC ACTION

Experiment 10: Effect on weight of medium when table's weight is psychically increased.

I have already mentioned (R.P.P., ch. iv) that when the table stands upright within the circle space, it can be made so heavy that it can only be lifted with difficulty. I wished to see the effect on the medium's weight when the table was thus affected.

I asked the operators to make the table very heavy. My wife having entered the circle, tried to lift the table but found that its weight had

been greatly increased. I told the operators to keep the new weight as steady as possible while I was taking the readings.

Weight of table » 7 lb. 14 oz.

Weight of raedium + chair + board before^the test = 135 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

during the test «= 115 lb. 8 oz.

Decrease in weight of medium due to the table's weight having been increased => 20 lb.

Experiment 11: Effect on weight of medium when table's weight is psychically increased.

In R.P.P., ch. iv, I have told how, if the table is placed upside down on the floor, its weight can be so increased that when an experimenter grasps it by the legs he finds great difficulty in raising it. The table, in fact, appears to be "glued" to the floor. I wished to find what happened to the medium's weight during the occurrence of the phenomenon.

The weight of the table was 7 lb. ti oz. It was turned upside down within the circle space, and I told the operators "to glue it to the floor." This they did and my wife grasped it by the legs from time to time and tested if it was fixed. I asked the operators to fix it as steadily as possible and to keep the fixing force constant while I was taking my observations.

Weight of medium] + chair + board

before the test =* 135 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

f during the test = 100 lb.r0 oz.]

'Decrease in medium's weight due to

the "glueing" of table to floor = 35 lb. 8 oz.

This was the maximum steady loss of weight.

I also told the operators to "glue" the table to the floor with various degrees of strength and on each occasion I found that the medium lost steady amounts of weight during the occurrence of the phenomenon (less, however, than the 35% lb. recorded above).

Experiment 12: Effect on weight of medium when table's weight is psychically increased.

The medium was sitting on the weighing machine. I turned the table (weight 12% lb.)

Fig. 16.

upside down and placed it on the platform of a smaller weighing machine on the floor within the circle. Fig. 16 represents the arrangement where A and B are the two weighing machines, M the medium and C the table.

I set the second machine so that it would balance at 28 lb. I said to the operators, "I want you to 'glue' the table to the platform, i. e., to press down on the table so that the lever of the machine shall just balance." In a very short time they did this. I had to tell them once or twice to add a little or subtract a little force, but when once obtained it was marvellous how steadily they could maintain the correct amount. I then went over to the weighing machine on which the medium was seated. My wife placed her fingers on the lever of the smaller machine and told me when the balance was just about correct, and simultaneously I took the medium's weight.

Weight of medium + chair + board

during experiment = 121 lb.

Decrease in medium's weight =

138^ lb. - 121 lb = 173^ lb.

Downward force on table = 28 — 12M - 15M lb.

The result may be considered correct to a pound or so either way.

These experiments pretty well clear up the doubtful points about temporary increased weight of the table. It is evident that when the table's weight is increased, with the table either standing upright or resting on the floor upside down, (1) the medium loses weight, (2) her loss of weight is practically the same as the increase of weight given to the table. This is as it should

be if a psychic arm from the medium grips some part of the table with its free end and then presses or pulls down upon it.

METHODS BY WHICH THE PSYCHIC CONNECTING ROD IS USED FOE VARIOUS PHENOMENA

Experiment 13: Effect of the phenomena on the medium when she is seated on bicycles.

I was anxious to discover what would happen to the medium if she were seated on a freelyrunning truck or something of that sort, while levitation was occurring, or while the table was being moved about the floor; was being pushed, pulled, and so on. As the simplest means of obtaining the kind of apparatus I wanted, I fixed two bicycles together and tied a piece of flat wood boarding across the mudguards of the rear wheels. The board was for the medium to sit upon. The bicycle combination was placed lengthwise along the floor of the seance chamber. Very little force was required to move it to and fro.

I arranged with the operators that the medium should sit on her ordinary chair until "power" was sufficiently developed, and that they should give three raps when they were ready for me to proceed with the experiment. In about a quarter of an hour, the summoning taps

being heard, the medium discarded her usual chair and sat on the board placed across the rear of the bicycles. Her feet could just reach the floor, but she could raise them when required and thus be completely free of the floor.

All the tests were carried out under two experimental conditions, (a) her feet just touching the floor, and (b) her feet off the floor, but so high was her seat that all the grip she could obtain with her feet on the floor was negligible and the results were found to be practically the same as those obtained when no part of her body was touching the floor. Her hands were lightly held by the sitters on either side of her, and, acting in accordance with my instructions, she sat perfectly still. I sat near her all the time.

Test A. — The operators were asked to produce levitation of the table.

The table was moved about the floor, an end was lifted, and various movements and shufflings went on for some considerable time, but complete levitation did not occur.

Result. — During the various movements of the table the bicycles were strongly pulled forward towards the table. I had to exert considerable muscular restraining force on them to prevent the motion, and give the table a chance to levitate, for as soon as the bicycles were actually allowed to move, the attempted levitations ceased. Levitation very nearly occurred, three

legs of the table being off the floor. Evidently the height of her seat and the generally awkward position of the medium prevented final success. My wife entered the circle and heljl the table a foot or so up in the air, upon which the operators took a powerful grip on its under-surface (which grip always synchronised with strong pull in of bicycles towards table) and levitation was almost obtained, for on my wife letting go, the table just fluttered to the floor.

In their endeavours to obtain levitation, the operators turned the table in all directions about the floor and tried at every angle.

During the steady til tings (which were many) and nearly complete levitations, the bicycles were pulled in towards the table fairly strongly, but not so strongly as during some other movements, such as shufflings, jumpings, dancings, etc., of the table on the floor.

Test B. — The table was placed in an upright position on the floor and the operators were told to make it heavy, i. e., apparently to increase its weight. My wife entered the circle and tested the "heaviness."

Result. — Very strong pull in of bicycles towards table during the period of the phenomenon. The bicycles had to be restrained with much force. During one of my observations on this test (for each test I took from three to six observations) I told the operators to remove

the force (whatever its nature) suddenly from the table. This they evidently did, for no sooner had I made the request than the bicycles (which an instant before were being pulled in strongly towards the table) were released, and jerked backwards a foot or so in the opposite direction (this, of course, was due to the restraining pull I was exerting on them).

Test C. — The table was turned upside down on the floor and the operators were asked to "glue" it to the floor. My wife tested it on several occasions and found it was fairly strongly fixed.

Result. — During the phenomenon the bicycles were strongly pulled in towards the table.

Test D. — The table was placed upright on the floor near edge of circle and I told my wife to hold it by the legs and press it in strongly towards the medium. (This is a common test with visitors at a demonstration seance, for when the medium is seated on her ordinary chair resting on the floor, a strong man cannot push the table in towards her, and the surprising thing is that if a psychic rod connects the medium with the table, the medium is not pushed over). I told the operators to resist her as strongly as they were able.

Result. — On all the occasions of this test the bicycles moved backwards towards the far wall away from the table, i. e., in the direction my

wife was pushing. I made very sure of this result, taking observations at least six times.

While my wife was pushing the table it moved forward with her about a foot or eighteen inches, i. e., it kept its normal distance from the medium— about 3 feet — constant.

Test E. — Same as D with the exception that my wife held the table in the air and then pushed inwards on it, instead of letting it rest on the floor and pushing.

Result. — Bicycles moved back as in D, the table following the bicycles, the distance between them being approximately maintained.

Test F. — Table on floor as in D, only, instead of pushing hard in towards medium, my wife pulled as strongly as she could away from medium, the operators resisting her.

Result. — Bicycles moved in towards table, but not so strongly as they moved out in test D. The table also moved forward a foot or so, presumably to keep its distance from the medium as constant as possible.

Test G. — The table was held up in the air and pulled directly away from the medium, the operators resisting.

Result. — Bicycles moved in towards table, but not so strongly as they moved back in test E. Table also moved forward a foot or so under my wife's pull, evidently to maintain constant distance.

During one of the observations in this test, my wife gave a sudden wrench to the table, when evidently the connecting link gave way, for she instantly felt the opposing force vanish and simultaneously the bicycles jerked back a foot or so in the opposite direction, i. e., away from the table (this was due to the restraining force I was exerting).

Experiment 14: Effect on weight of medium when the experimenter presses on the table in the direction of the medium,

I had often noted that if the table stands upright on the floor at the edge of the circle directly opposite the medium and on the side remote from her, and an experimenter gets behind the table and presses on it directly towards her, he cannot move it if the operators so desire. I wished to find the effect on the medium's weight due to this phenomenon.

The weight of the table used was 7 lb. 14 oz. It was placed upright on the floor on the edge of the circle opposite the medium, and my wife grasped its two back legs and pressed inwards* in a line with the medium and in a direction approximately parallel to the floor. She could not shift the table a fraction of an inch.

Weight of medium -f- chair + board

before test = 135 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

while my wife was pressing on the

table as steadily as possible = 119 lb. 12 oz.

Decrease in medium's weight due to

the push = 15 lb. 12 oz.

Experiment 15: Effect on weight of medium when the experimenter presses on the table away from the medium.

Medium on weighing machine and table upright on floor near edge of circle remote from medium.

My wife pulled steadily on the table away from medium, the operators resisting.

Weight of medium + chair + board before pull.. . = 138^ lb.

Weight of medium + chair + board during pull = 143M lb.

Increase of medium's weight due to pull = 51b.

After the reading was taken my wife suddenly pulled with all her strength and consequently more or less jerkily. The whole weighing machine, with medium, chair, and board, moved three or four inches along the floor in the direction of pull (the weighing machine was supported on four little wheels).

In order to verify the results of Experiment 14, my wife then pushed the table towards medium, the operators resisting. While the pushing force was being exerted there was always a

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

decrease of a few pounds in the medium's weight. Also, on one occasion the whole machine moved back several inches in the direction of push.

Experiment 16 : How the psychic rod acts when a man, though exerting all his strength, is unable to push the table (standing on the "floor, two or three feet in front of the medium) inwards towards the medium.

It is obvious that if the psychic rod (or rods) issued straight from the medium's body and gripped the near legs of the table, the medium

-<r

Fig. 17.

and the chair on which she was sitting would be bodily pushed back when a man (or two men) stood behind the table and pushed horizontally inwards on it with all their strength.

Fig. 17 will make this clear. M represents the medium sitting on her chair, T the table standing on the floor some distance from her, and R a psychic rod issuing from above the ankles of the medium and gripping a near leg of the table

and thus forming a strut. The arrow shows the direction in which a man pushes. This is undoubtedly the method used when only a comparatively light pressure is exerted on the table, for in this case the friction of the bottom of the legs of the medium's chair on the floor is sufficient to prevent it (and her) being pushed back. (If the reader will turn to Experiment 13 he will find that when the medium wa.s seated on the bicycles, instead of her chair, the bicycles moved back when force was exerted on the back of the table, showing that simple straight rods in all probability connected the medium with the table in that case.) But when really great force is exerted, such as when two or even three men push together, it is perfectly apparent the medium and her chair would be pushed back bodily, but this, as a matter of fact, never happens. So it was obvious to me that for large forces there must be a modification of the psychic rods connecting medium with table; the reaction must be taken to a large extent by the floor, i. e., the rods must touch the floor somewhere.

When questioned, the operators said that for comparatively light pressures, the simple straight rods are used, and that for great pressures the rods issuing from the medium proceed to the floor, and then go from the floor to the near legs of the table.

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

I asked them whereabouts on the floor the pressure was exerted and moved my hand about in front of the medium until the approximately correct position was reached, this being indicated to me by raps. This position was imme-

Fig. 18.

diately in front of the medium's feet. I placed the pressure recorder (see Experiment 3, fig. 10) on the floor there just in front of one of her feet and asked the operators to exert their pressure on the recorder instead of on the floor. In a short time the bell rang and while it was ringing I pushed strongly inwards on the back of the table and found I could not move it. The experiment was carried out three or four times. Now, I have proved to my satisfaction by a multitude of observations that the psychic rod issues usually from the neighbourhood of the medium's ankle. Hence it follows that the path of the psychic rod is approximately as shown on the diagram (fig. 18) , where M is the medium, T table, P pressure recorder on the floor, and BR the two parts of the psychic rod. In other

words, a short strut projects from the medium's ankle to the floor, and from the floor rises at a small angle and grips a near leg of the table.

Although I only tested for one rod, without doubt a rod issues from each ankle of the me-

Le<5 of Table

Rod Grips

TABLE LEG HER.E

Fig. 19.

dium and each grips one of the near legs of the table. It does not simply press on the legs, but grips them, as can easily be discovered by manipulating the table in various ways. A large downward force must be exerted along the limb AC (fig. 19), which makes the part C of the rod (where the direction changes) grip the floor strongly. At C the direction alters, and B is a strut connecting C with the leg of table. The consequence is that when muscular force is exerted on the table in direction of medium, B strongly resists the table's motion. The part B may bend a little but I have never known it to give way.

NEW PROBLEMS ON REACTION

THE TABLE RESTS ON THE FLOOR SEVERAL FEET DISTANT FROM THE ME-DIUM. THE EXPERI-MENTER ATTEMPTS TO PUSH IT IN ALONG THE FLOOR TOWARDS THE MEDIUM, THE OPERA-TORS RESISTING. SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

(a) Exerting a push

along directions about parallel to A (fig. 20) I found that the table was quite easily turned about K, the foot of the front legs.

(b) Considerable force

exerted parallel to the floor, such as M, could not make the table budge an inch.

(c) When I applied a

vertical force, such as S, I found that the table could be easily moved upwards, though it did not feel free but seemed to be sliding or slipping

through some kind of a surface which was

gripping the front legs, (d) Attempts to push the table horizontally

sideways were strongly resisted. There is little doubt that the front legs of the table were gripped a few inches above the floor. Probably in this case two straight psychic rods joined the legs of the table straight to the ankles of the medium.

An ordinary push in direction M would not be sufficient to make the medium and her chair move along the floor against friction and the reaction would therefore not require to be taken on the floor, and I have found by experience that the operators always use the simplest mechanism consistent with the successful production of the phenomenon desired.

AN INCIDENT

An experimenter was inside the circle space and the table was levitated. He was anxious to experience the various psychic resistances to applied forces. Accordingly, he pushed down on the table and felt the elastic resistance to levitation and he pushed inwards towards the medium and felt the rigid resistance (see Experiment 19, K.P.P.).

He then asked the operators to place the table on the floor and to prevent him pushing it in-?

wards towards the medium. The table descended to the floor. As soon as it reached it the experimenter heard a sucking noise on the under-surface as though a kind of sucker there was relaxing or changing its grip and simultaneously the same kind of noise on each front leg as though suckers were taking hold there. The light was quite good, and there was nothing to be seen.

We asked the operators whereabouts on the table they had their grip and they immediately gave audible demonstration by rapping on each front leg and on the under-surface.

They said they had three psychic arms out in this particular case.

They also declared that they can have as many as six arms or rods out at one time.

DIRECT DOWNWARD 3?USH ON SCALEPAN OF BALANCE

Experiment 17: Downward psychic pressure on scalepan of balance.

The compression balance with its electrical attachments (as described in Experiment 6) was placed on the floor within the circle and the table was moved aside. The balance was adjusted so that the electric bell would ring when a downward pressure on the scalepan of just about 19

lb. was reached. I asked the operators to press on the scalepan and ring the bell, which they did with great ease. To find the effect on the medium's weight:

Weight of medium + chair + board before test = 135 lb. 8 oz.

Weight of medium + chair + board

during the ringing of the bell ..... = 115 lb. 8 oz. Decrease in medium's weight while

the bell was ringing and while,

therefore, there was a pressure of

at least 19 lb. on the scalepan = 20 lb.

It is unlikely that the operators would press on the scalepan with a force much in excess of that necessary to ring the bell; hence the correspondence between the weight lost by the medium (20 lb.) and the downward force required to ring the bell (19 lb.) is suggestive.

THE PSYCHIC MECHANISM EMPLOYED WHEN THE MEDIUM AND THE CHAIR ON WHICH SHE IS SITTING ARE BODILY MOVED ABOUT THE FLOOR

OP THE STANCE ROOM.

I propounded the problem some time ago in Light as to the method employed by the operators in sliding the medium and the chair on which she is sitting about the floor of the room. I asked for an indication likely to lead to a solution of the mystery, but none reached me, and I was not surprised. I was never able myself to

form a satisfactory conception as to how the thing was done.

The solution of this problem, in addition to the knowledge of psychic things which it gives us, throws some light on what the operators are able to tell us concerning the modus operandi of their phenomena. For this is one of the few cases in which they have informed me beforehand of certain definite facts. Their statement was a little vague, but was correct in its main points, as I will show later.

The following is the explanation of the operators, obtained from them after a deal of questioning and cross-examination : — The medium is sitting on her chair. From each of her ankles there issues a psychic rod which inclines downwards gradually to the floor within the circle. It grips the floor at the place of contact. Out of this inclined rod there issues a branch rod or arm which pushes backwards on a front leg of the medium's chair. There are two inclined rods — one from each ankle of the medium — and therefore two projecting arms which together exert sufficient force on the front legs of the chair to push it bodily along the floor.

Experiment 18: Movement of medium and chair along the floor.

I obtained four little metal gliders, and hammered them into the feet of the medium's chair,

so that it could slide more easily and uniformly along the floor than was the case without them. The only other apparatus was a piece of fairly stiff pasteboard about twelve inches long by eight inches wide. I informed the operators that I would first see if there was any downward force on the floor in front of the medium while the medium and her chair were being moved backwards. Accordingly I placed the piece of pasteboard flat on the floor beneath the table (which was standing within the circle), holding the end of it remote from the medium in my fingers. I could thus easily tell if any downward force was being exerted on the pasteboard by the difficulty I would experience in endeavouring to lift it from the floor. I asked the operators to proceed with the test.

Nothing happened for a considerable time, and I was beginning to think that the explanation of the operators was incorrect when they informed me, by raps, that an aura from my hand, holding the end of the pasteboard, was interfering with the phenomenon. On asking if I should put on gloves, they answered in the affirmative, and I accordingly did so. In a short time the chair and medium began to slide slowly backwards along the floor.

During the whole period of the movement there was a great downward force on the pasteboard— so great, in fact, that I was quite unable

to raise it from the floor, although I tried my hardest. I carried out the experiment again with a like result. The medium's chair slid back altogether a foot or so, but the location of the downward force did not seem to change, i. e., to recede with the chair. It thus appeared that the first part of the operators' statement that a rod issuing from the medium inclines downwards to the floor in front of her, where it presses on and grips the floor strongly, has some basis in fact.

I then went over beside the medium and placed the piece of pasteboard vertically against one of the front legs of her chair, resting the lower edge on the floor. While the medium and her chair were being slowly moved backwards along the floor, I found that there was a great horizontal force exerted on the pasteboard and through the pasteboard on to the leg of the chair. So great was the force that, while it was being exerted, I was quite unable, although I tried several times, to remove the pasteboard from its position against the leg of the chair. The force appeared to be exerted horizontally on the leg quite low down — not more than an inch or two above the floor. It thus seemed that the second part of the operators' statement, that pressure is exerted directly on the front legs of the chair, is correct.

I next placed the medium's chair on the top of a drawing-board resting on the platform of a

weighing machine. After some futile attempts the operators succeeded in sliding machine, board, chair and medium quite easily along the floor. The motion at my request was made slow and prolonged.

READINGS

Initial weight of medium -f- chair -f-

board =» 133 lb.

Weight of medium + chair + board while the machine was being fairly steadily moved along the floor = 851b.

Decrease in weight of medium « 48 lb.

The pushing force was exerted on the chair and not on the front of the weighing machine

Fig. 21.

because the chair was several times pushed off the platform during the preliminary attempts, and on the successful occasions it always moved back of itself until it was against the backrail of the machine.

Fig. 21 indicates what I consider a provisional deduction from the above facts.

R is a straight psychic rod which grips firmly the floor at K and pushes directly on the chair

leg at D. The rod is "fed" at F by a "feeder" proceeding from the ankle A of the medium.

It is pretty obvious that the inclined rod K grips the floor at K, and does not merely rest upon it, for in the latter case it would inevitably be pushed along the floor while pressure was exerted on the chair leg. I have stated that the downward force was so great on the pasteboard when it was on the floor at K that I could not raise it the merest fraction of an inch from the floor; and further, the force seemed to be exerted at the far end of the pasteboard (with reference to my position) — i. e., the psychic rod was evidently not only pressing on the pasteboard, but was gripping the floor round about the edge of it as well.

The fact that the inclined rod at its floor end actually grips and does not merely rest on the floor was audibly demonstrated. Several times during the preliminary attempts to move the weighing machine and medium, the end at K was evidently torn from its hold on the floor, for a sharp, shuffling noise was heard on two occasions resembling the noise likely to be made by the forcible pulling from its grip of a plastic gripping material. And this occurred at moments when I was just expecting the machine to move.

Let us consider the results obtained with the weighing machine.

In Fig. 22 the rod R is shown, fixed to the floor at K, and inclining upwards to the leg of the chair (resting on the platform of the weighing machine) at D. The force P is exerted in the direction of the arrow. The height of D from the floor is about 9 inches. (The platform and board, the latter not shown on the diagram,

Pig. 22.

are together 7% in. in height, and V/2 in. are allowed for the rod to obtain sufficient clearance. I showed that the pushing force on the leg is applied only an inch or two from its foot.)1 The distance MK is about 24 in., M being the projection of D on the floor. The pushing force P at D can be resolved into two components, a vertical and a horizontal one. With the distances as given the vertical component is 9/24 times the horizontal, and the horizontal component is the one which overcomes the friction and moves machine and load slowly along the floor.

By direct experiment I found that with Mr.

Morrison sitting on the machine, the horizontal force required to move machine, etc., slowly along the floor was 28 lb. (of course the force varied somewhat, but that was the maximum value while the machine was moving slowly along ; the starting force was about 32 lb. ) . Now the medium weighs about 14 lb. less than Mr. Morrison, so that if we say the horizontal force required is 28 lb., we are on the safe side.

The vertical component of the pushing force P, being 9/24 of the horizontal component, works out at 9/24 X 28 =: 10% lb.

Now the vertical component of P decreases the weight of the medium. While the machine, etc., are moving slowly back the medium's weight should therefore decrease by about 10% lb. Even if MK be supposed equal to MD (fig. 22) the very limit conceivable, the medium's weight should only decrease by 28 lb. (These values are maximum and do not take account of decrease of friction due to the upward component of P.)

But we find that while the machine, medium, etc., are being pushed back steadily and slowly, the medium really loses 48 lb. in weight.

It follows, I think, that her loss of weight is not wholly accounted for by the vertical component of the force P. How, then, can it be accounted for? Most probably by the fact that the psychic rod R contains matter removed from

the medium's body, i. e., that an integral part of the rod is matter from the medium's body.

I think, also, that this experiment indicates that the operating entity in this case works from outside the medium's body.

THE QUESTION OF MATTES ABSTRACTED FROM THE BODY OF THE MEDIUM. MATTER USED IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE PSYCHIC RODS AND CAN-TILEVERS.

Eecent research has given the following results:

A drawing-board was placed on the platform of a weighing-machine and a chair was placed on the top of the board. The medium (Miss Goligher) sat on the chair, with her feet resting on the board.

Experiment 19 : Psychic matter used for cantilever.

I said to the operators, <<You say the levitating cantilever contains matter from the body of the medium. I want you to take out from her body the matter you use in the construction of the cantilever you employ to levitate -this table (weight 12% lb.) and to place this matter loosely on the floor — not to build up the cantilever, but simply to place the matter required

for it on the floor. Give three raps when you have done this."

The medium's weight began to decrease and in a few seconds became fairly steady. Then I heard the three raps, signifying that the operation was complete.

Res-ctlt:

Weight of medium + chair + board

before the experiment =» 138 J^ lb.

Fairly steady weight of medium + chair + board after the raps were given = 122)^ lb.

Decrease in weight in medium =* 16 lb.

It is noteworthy that when I carried out the game test about eighteen months previously, I obtained the same result within a pound or two. (See Experiment 63, R.P.R)

Experiment 20: Psychic matter placed on drawing-board.

I asked the operators to put the matter they said they abstracted in Experiment 19, not on the floor, but on the drawing-board under the medium's chair (the drawing-board was resting on the platform of the weighing machine). They gave three raps when the operation was complete.

Result. — The medium's "weight showed no difference from her normal of 138% lb-

This, of course, is as it should be, as any actual

matter taken from her body and placed on the drawing-board would still be accounted for by the weighing-machine, provided that such matter was acted on by gravity in the normal way.

Experiment 21 : Psychic matter used for largest rapping rod,

I asked the operator^ to lake from the body of the medium the matter they use in the construction of the rod employed to give their loudest sledge-hammer blow and to place this matter loosely on the floor — not to form an actual rod, but just to place the matter contained within it on the floor. Three raps to be given when the operation was complete.

Result:

Weight of medium -f- chair + board

before the test = 138^ lb.

Weight of medium + chair + board

when the three raps were given ... = 96 >£ lb. Decrease in weight of the medium. . . «= 42 lb.

