ter of temperament and that I am unduly prejudiced. I can never get rid of the feeling in the case of phenomena such as trance speaking, clairvoyance, clairaudience, automatic writing, planchette and Ouija board, etc., that the mind of the medium has far too much to do with the results. It is difficult to see how the mind of the medium can lift a table weighing 50 lb. clear of the floor when it is placed a couple of feet in front of her, but it is not at all difficult to picture how her mind, in its sub-conscious aspect, may be responsible for the general inanities of trance speaking, or what passes nine times out of ten for clairvoyance. The reader should understand that I do not decry the genuine nature of mental phenomena but that I am appalled at the difficulties of sifting them. There seems so little one can come to grips with. Of course phenomena of the mental class are much more common than those of the physical and that may account for our hearing so much about them. For one physical medium such as Miss Goligher there are a thousand so-called clairvoyants. I am not at all inclined to the opinion that it is by means of the mental phenomena that all doubt of the existence of a psychic realm will eventually be removed. I think, rather, that this will be accomplished largely by the "direct voice" and psychic photography, which are both phases of physical phenomena,

Some people have grown accustomed to look upon physical phenomena with contempt, but I think their attitude is a mistaken one.

(24) Q. Have the phenomena occurring with Miss Goligher shown any signs of changing in character?

A. No. In essentials they are the same now as they were four years ago. Of course they are of greater magnitude, variety, and accuracy, but their type has not altered. We had hoped to obtain materialisations or the direct voice and a cabinet was erected for that purpose in the seance room. But nothing came of it. I am inclined to think that each medium possesses his or her own particular type of phenomena, and that it is seldom capable of varying or embracing other types, at least to any notable extent.



Chapter VI. Contact Phenomena

I am now going to describe some experiments I have carried out with "contact" phenomena, i.e., those in which the hands of the sitters are in contact with the table throughout the seance. Hitherto, as the reader is aware, I have dealt only with phenomena in which there was no contact whatever between the table and the medium or sitters.

Contact phenomena are quite common. Nearly every family contains one member at least who is capable of producing them. Some people, it is true, can produce them more quickly and more violently than others. All that is necessary is that a few persons sit round a wooden table and place their hands lightly upon its surface. If the requisite mediumship be present (and the mediumship required is of quite a low order) the table will sooner or later shake, move about, tilt up and down, and make various other motions not apparently due to muscular pressure exerted by the sitters. Many thousands of people have had experience of phenomena of this kind.

These table movements with hands in contact may conceivably be produced in three ways:

(1) The table may be consciously moved by

muscular pressure from the sitters.

(2) The table may be unconsciously moved by

muscular pressure from the sitters.

(3) The table may be moved without the aid of

muscular action at all.

The first tests I carried out were to see if (3) above was true, i.e., to see if sometimes the movements of the table with hands in contact were really not due to the action of muscular force exerted through the fingers upon the surface of the table. The person who is interested in spiritualistic phenomena will recognise at once that this is an extremely important matter. For if it can be shown that such table movements can be obtained without the direct aid of muscular action, then the messages received via the table must be delivered by something other than the simple process of mind acting on muscle and muscle on table. In short, there must be some unusual process going on, which at any rate is worthy of investigation.

The following tests were not carried out with the Goligher circle but with a few other friends, one of whom happened to be a very strong medium of the "contact" order. They were carried out in my own house in a small laboratory I have

fitted up for the purpose of psychic investigation.

Experiment. To see if movements of the table could be obtained not due to muscular pressure, and to make other observations on "contact" phenomena.

The apparatus employed will be understood from an inspection of Figs. 27 and 28, which are from photographs of the table in position.

Four flat rectangular pieces of wood are hinged to another rectangular shaped piece of wood screwed to the centre of the table. The four sitters place their fingers upon the hinged pieces under each of which is a pair of metal contacts in an electric bell circuit. Each pair of contacts is normally kept slightly separate by a piece of spiral spring fixed to the table. A chalk line is drawn across each hinged piece of wood three-quarters the distance from the outside. The hands of the sitters are kept beyond the chalk lines. The pressure on each piece of wood required to make the electric bell ring can be nicely adjusted from an ounce to a pound or so. From each corner of the table a cord proceeds to a circular spring balance reading to 50 lb., the latter being tied to an overhead beam. The cords are normally adjusted so that the table clears the floor by six inches or so.

Fig. 27

Fig. 28

The weight of the table with apparatus was 13% lb., as indicated by the spring balance.

The electrical apparatus was so adjusted that it was impossible for any one of the 4 hinged wooden leaves to be pressed downwards with a greater pressure than y2 lb. without causing the bell to ring. The maximum pressure that could be put upon the table without the bell ringing was therefore 2 lb. Even if the leaves were pressed down considerably within the chalk lines with a force of y2 lb. the bell would still ring, but the sitters always had their fingers well outside these lines.

STANCE I

Sitters: Mr. X (medium), Miss A, Mrs. B, Mrs. C.

The table was first placed upon the floor (the suspending cords being disconnected).

In about ten minutes after the opening of the seance, the table began to shuffle about the floor and in a little time lifted twice at Mrs. B's end. (Mr. X sat opposite Mrs. B). The bell did not ring.

In about half an hour the movements became powerful. I then hung up the table from the overhead beam.

I asked the operators to increase the table's weight.

Fully half a dozen times the pointer on the

spring balance went round to 26 lb. without the bell ringing. The table's weight being 13% lb. and the maximum downward force it was possible to put on the table under the conditions mentioned being 2 lb., we have the table's weight increased at least by 26 — 15% = 10%' lb. by means not due to normal muscular pressure.

Later on the pointer on the spring balance moved slowly round to 32 lb. and then twice to 34 lb., and finally near the end of the sitting to 41 lb. This last was equivalent to a downward force applied to the table of 41 - — 15% = 25% lb.

The increased weight was not put upon the table unexpectedly or haphazardly but only at such times as I made the definite request to the operators. Furthermore the increase of weight was a gradual process, occupying from three to five seconds before the maximum value was attained. Sometimes the operators were not successful in reaching the value hoped for, and on these occasions the weight was removed from the table and other efforts made, as was evidenced by the pointer again moving gradually round the dial of the spring balance. The fingers of the sitters were only lightly touching the hinged leaves at the proper place and many control tests showed that it was quite impossible to press down in the ordinary way with a total

force exceeding a couple of pounds without causing the bell to ring.

It is noteworthy that, as in non-contact phenomena, the most powerful results were often obtained towards the close of the seance.

As a further test the operators were asked to remove some weight from the table. On the request being made, the pointer on the balance began to move backwards towards the zero mark. Several times the table was lightened by about 7 lb. and on one occasion the pointer on the balance went right back to zero, showing that the whole of the table's weight had been removed. With the fingers of the experimenters on the apparatus as described, it is unnecessary to say that it was quite impossible to accomplish this feat by either conscious or unconscious pressure from the hands or fingers.

The above tests show, as was sufficiently evident already to those familiar with this class of phenomena, that the movements of the table when there is true psychic action upon it are not due to muscular pressure (at any rate in the ordinary sense) and that their cause must be looked for elsewhere.

Further incidents. — During the time the table was standing upon the floor and before it was suspended from the ceiling, I stood over it and raised it a little. At this time it was under strong psychic action ,and I was surprised to find

that what appeared to be more or less rigid bars were connecting it low clown on the legs to the medium. The kind of rigidity was exactly the same to the sense of feeling as the rigidity experienced at the Goligher circle with non-contact phenomena. Especially did the table resist being turned in a horizontal plane, or of being pulled or pushed horizontally. But if I pulled or pushed too hard the psychic link (whatever its nature) gave way and I had to wait for some minutes before it could be established again. Many times at this and subsequent stances did I, with my muscular sense, try to locate these psychic connecting links, and to my surprise, I always distinctly felt them present when the psychic action was at all strong. With my years of experience at the Goligher circle I could make no mistake. The type of connecting link, in its main characteristics, was the same both for contact and for non-contact phenomena. At a contact circle held with entirely different sitters and in a town over 50 miles from Belfast I subsequently found that these psychic bars were also present and that they seemed to extend from the leg of the table low down, to the ankle of the medium, who, in this case, said that he felt during the whole seance a cold sensation on the skin near one of his ankles, this peculiar feeling extending over a space about the size of half-acrown. He said the spot on his skin felt just as

though it had been rubbed with menthol. The sensation went away as soon as the sitting was over.

It therefore seems that "contact" and "noncontact" table phenomena are not so dissimilar in their main processes as might be supposed.

The operators evidently found it easier to increase the table's weight than to decrease it; they seemed able to accomplish the former as often as I wished once the seance was well under way, but they were not always successful with the latter and appeared only to succeed after considerable trouble.

Sometimes when the pointer on the balance had successfully moved round to 30 lb. or so without the bell ringing it remained there for some seconds, and then as it gradually returned to its normal position of 13 lb. or thereabouts, the bell gave a ring when it was about half way back. This often happened. The bell did not ring when the downward pressure was being applied, but strange to say, sometimes gave short sharp rings while the pressure was being removed.

Sometimes while we were not doing anything in particular, the bell started ringing — long continuous rings and also short sharp ones. All the sitters declared they were not ringing it. I asked the operators if they were responsible, when immediately it was rung long and repeatedly as

though in affirmation. Also, the usual code was employed, three rings for "Yes," one for "No," and two for "Doubtful." Of course there was no direct evidence that the operators were really ringing the bell, as they said they were, because a very slight push from the finger of any of the sitters would suffice to do this. The sitters, however, declared most emphatically they were not consciously doing it,

STANCE II

Sitters:* Mr. X (medium)1, Miss A, Mr& C, Mr. F.

As in Seance I, the table with itg electrical contact apparatus was suspended from a spring balance tied to a beam in the ceiling. The sitters sat round it and rested their fingers on the hinged leaves outside the chalk lines. A total downward force exceeding 2 lb. was sufficient to cause electrical contact and thus to ring the bell.

The operators many times increased the weight of the table without causing the bell to ring. The maximum pull down was 34 lb. (as registered on the spring balance) which is equivalent to lSy2 lb. extra weight, exclusive of weight of table. The operators tried many times before the 34 lb. mark was reached. The average additional weight put upon the table during the vari-

ous attempts was about 12 or 13 IE The absence of Mrs. B seemed to affect the magnitude of phenomena at this sitting.

I placed the platform weighing machine beside the table, put a drawing-board upon it and a chair upon the board. Mr. X then sat upon the chair and along with the other sitters placed his fingers lightly on the contact apparatus.

Weight of Mr. X + chair + board = 163 lb.

I moved the rider along the lever of the weighing machine so that the lever would balance at a total weight of 155% lb.

I asked the operators to increase the weight of the table in the usual way.

I watched the circular spring balance above the table and I found that when it nearly registered 26 lb. (bell not ringing), the lever of the weighing machine, which was previously hard up against the top stop, fell to the bottom stop. The weight of the table had been increased by (at least) 26 — 15% — 10y2 lb.

Mr. X's weight had been reduced by

163 lb. — 155% lb. = 7% lb. Other similar experiments showed conclusively that each time the table's weight was psychically increased, the medium's weight was reduced, but there did not seem to be any fixed relation between increase of table's weight and reduction in Mr. X's weight.

Non-contact movements.*—! had known all the

time that Mr. X was the chief medium but I was also under the impression that Mrs. B supplied some of the mediumship. That Mr. X was the chief medium was however conclusively proved at this seance. For non-contact movements occurred due to him. Towards the conclusion of the seance he held the fingers of one hand about two inches above his hinged leaf and on request the operators rang the bell easily and often. The electric flash between the contacts under Mr. X's hinged leaf, as the bell was rung, established the fact that the phenomenon was due to him. It seemed to me that a psychic prolongation of his fingers was in this instance responsible for the phenomenon.

stance ni

Sitters: Mr. X (medium), Miss A, Mrs. B, Mrs. 0.

The table was suspended from the ceiling by cords and the electrical contact apparatus used as before. Mr. X sat on the weighing machine. I asked the operators to increase the weight of the table. In the early part of the seance they seemed to experience difficulty in doing this, but towards the end they accomplished it quite easily, the bell not ringing.

There was some difficulty in getting the decreased weight of Mr. X corresponding to the

CONTACT PHENOMENA 17i

increased weight of table ; in fact there did not seem to be any relation between the two. This much, however, can be said, that Mr. X's weight always decreased when the table's weight increased. The following are some readings:

Loss of weight Increased weight

of Mr. X of table

4 lb. 8 lb.

7 lb. 12 lb.

7 lb. 11 lb.

The last two are nearly correct as I set the rider at a certain mark on the lever, and placing one hand on the lever and the other on the pointer of the balance, noted exactly the mark attained by the pointer when the lever fell.

Mrs. B then sat on the weighing machine and Mr. X took her place (which was directly opposite). I balanced her weight and then set back the rider along the lever. With a finger of one hand on the pointer of the balance and a finger of the other on the lever, I marked the exact point on the spring balance at which the lever of the weighing machine fell. The following is the reading:

Loss of weight

Increased weight

of Mrs. B

of table

33^ lb.

8 1b.

There was, however, a difference at this seance between the results for Mrs. B and Mr. X. With Mrs. B the pointer on the spring balance often

went almost completely back to normal and yet her weight remained considerably reduced. That is, though the increased weight had been removed from the table, Mrs. B's weight still remained reduced. Furthermore, the amount of reduction of her weight seemed variable.

On one occasion, without asking for it, the pointer on the spring balance went back to zero, i.e., the weight of the table was decreased by an amount about equal to its own weight.

On several occasions when the weight was increased by about 16 lb. the table was trembling violently. On these occasions the pointer of the spring balance was oscillating over a small arc at a great rate.

STANCE IV

Sitters: Mr. X (medium), Miss A, Mrs. B, Mrs. C.

Table arrangements as before. Mr. X was sitting on the weighing machine. Further weight tests were made. The following are the results :

Mr. X's weight always decreased when the weight of the table increased, and it also always diminished when the weight of the table decreased; i.e., he experienced a reduction in weight in both cases. Furthermore, sometimes when there was apparently no action on the table at all, his weight was temporarily reduced a few pounds.

On one occasion his weight was reduced 1 lb., and on another % lb., when the table's weight was decreased 4 or 5 lb. For an increase of weight of the table of 3 or 4 lb. Mr. X's weight diminished about 1% lb- It diminished 4 or 5 lb. when there was an increase of from 8 to 10 lb. in table's weight.

It seems that there is a mnch less decrease in the medium's weight for a reduction in the table's weight than for a corresponding increase in the table's weight.

Near the end of the seance the bell rang once when nobody was within a foot of the table. Also, when the sitters sat round the table without touching it, the table several times oscillated about, the movement being a psychic non-contact one.

Mrs. B sat with her hands on her knees and the remaining three sitters had their hands on the contact apparatus. This arrangement seemed immediately to increase the magnitude of psychic results on table.

On those occasions when the table was pulled down (its weight increased) and pushed up (its weight decreased) the pull or push seemed to be quite centrally applied to the table, for there was no twisting movement. The resultant of the pull or push must, therefore, be practically in line with the centre of the table.

Several times after the table's weight had been

increased from 8 to 12 lb. and when the pointer on the spring balance had returned to normal (i.e., no pressure on table) Mr. X's weight did not simultaneously come back to normal, but remained several pounds reduced for a considerable time.

STANCE V

Sitters: Mr. X (medium), Miss A, Mrs. B, Mrs. C.

All the under-surf ace and legs of the table were covered with turpentine soot, in order to see if any marks would be left due to a psychic structure gripping the wood of the table. One such mark was found, but it requires verification. The sitting was chiefly remarkable for a message which was laboriously spelled out, the table turning in the air when the correct letter of the alphabet was reached (I called out the letters). The following was the message:

"Clean table, tie hands and feet of sitters to their chairs and sit nine inches back from the table."

STANCE VI

Sitters: Mr. X (medium), Miss A, Mrs. B, Mrs. 0.

I tied the sitters' legs together at the ankles with strong cord. At first I also tied each sit-

ter's own hands together, but later altered this arrangement and tied each sitter's hands to his neighbour's on either side of him, thinking this procedure would give better results. The circle sat at a distance of a foot or so from the table which was suspended in the usual way. Thus no one was touching the table with any part of his body. Nevertheless the table commenced to twist and tilt and oscillate about. The movements were not very strong but they were genuine psychic movements of the non-contact order. The table moved by jerks, not with soft gliding motions as one might expect, but as though it were gripped somewhere and actually shoved about — the exact type of movements as at the Goligher circle, although on a much smaller scale.

After some time the sitters placed their hands on the contact apparatus when immediately the movements became very powerful. The table's weight decreased 10 lb. and later on 20 lb. without the bell ringing.

The phenomena without contact seemed to be much of the same type as those with contact, only, as I have said, on a much smaller scale. Hence it seems that the placing of the hands on the table simply makes the production of the phenomena more easy but does not alter its main characteristics.

GENERAL

The chief outstanding points in connection with these tests on "contact" phenomena are the following :

(1) the increases and decreases of weight of the table are not due to the muscular action of the medium or sitters.

(2) the medium or mediums (there may be more than one in this sort of circle) lose weight while the table is being psychically acted upon.

(3) the medium's loss of weight does not endure only during the time the table is being acted upon, but may last for some time after psychic action has ceased.

(4) there is strong evidence of a psychic arm or link connecting the legs of the medium with the legs of the table. The characteristics of this arm appear similar to that of the arm which levitates the table in "non-contact" phenomena of the Goligher type.

(5) since in this case the "contact" phenomena changed into weak phenomena of the "noncontact" type, it is reasonable to suppose that the two types have features in common.

(6) for heavy movements of the whole table the psychic arm would appear to issue from the lower part ol the legs of the medium; but psychic prolongations can also issue from the fingers, as witness the case in which the electric

bell rang when the medium held his fingers several inches above the contact apparatus. As a matter of fact I find that these psychic structures almost invariably issue from the extremities of the medium's body either in the vicinity of hands or feet. It was so with Miss Goligher and would appear to be the same with Mr. X.



Chapter VII. Direct Voice Phenomena

I am now going to describe some experiments I carried out on "direct voice" phenomena, which phenomena occurred during several seances held in my own house. As the reader is no doubt aware, the "direct voice" is a rather rare form of psychic phenomenon. Voices, not apparently the voice of the medium or of any of the sitters, speak from the air within or around the circle. They speak through thin metal cones or "trumpets" which seemingly float about in the air under psychic support, their function being to concentrate the voice sounds and thus make them more audible than they otherwise would be. I refer the reader who desires to obtain a good general idea of this type of mediumship to the late Vice-Admiral Moore's book, "The Voices."

; The medium who was responsible for the voice phenomena occurring at the seances held in my house was Mrs. Z, a well-known public psychic. There has been much controversy over this woman's mediumship. Her seances, in or-

der to produce any result worth mentioning, have to be held in absolute darkness, which, however, I believe, is generally true of all sittings for the "direct voice" with all mediums. Hence there is considerable scope for fraud if the medium be a fraudulent one.

Mrs. Z has been going up and down the country for a number of years, giving hundreds of seances. I do not think anything definite has ever been discovered during this period of time which points conclusively to fraud. I have heard the explanations of many people who claim to describe how her phenomena are produced fraudulently, but when these explanations are critically examined they are found to be of little value.

The reader, however, must understand that the experiments I carried out with this medium were done under the following limitations :

(1) They were nearly all carried out in com-

plete darkness.

(2) The medium was a public one.

I carried out the tests for my own satisfaction and did not think of publishing them; but on consideration, I have come to the conclusion that they should be put on record, if for no other reason than that the results may be compared hereafter with the vast quantities of experimental work that will have to be done if we are ever to get at the bottom of this psychic question.

It must be distinctly understood by the reader that I do not guarantee the genuineness of the results given below. I did everything I could to prevent fraud; but in an absolutely dark seance room it is obviously impossible to ensure complete prevention. The reader must draw his own conclusions, or wait till the results obtained are compared with similar results from other "direct voice" mediums.

The sittings were held in my own house in a small laboratory I have fitted up for psychic work. The sitters were all my personal friends specially invited to the seances by myself.

Fig. 29 shows (in connection with other apparatus) a photograph of the two trumpets used. Each of them was made in two sections of thin tinned iron, which fitted tightly together telescopically. The particulars are as follows :

No. 1, weight - 1 lb. 2 oz.

No. 2, weight 1 lb.

Length of each 34 inches

Apertures ZA inch and 4 inch diameter

STANCE I

Date— Saturday, 20th April, 1918. Time 8.00-9.30 p. m.

Weights of medium and sitters just before and just after the seance:

Fig. 29.

Weights just before Weights just after

stance — pounds seance — pounds

Mrs. Z (medium) 279% 279^

Mrs. A 1393^ 139^

Mr. X 160M 158^

Mr. R 189 1883^

Mrs. Q 1433^ 143

Mr. M 177^ 177^

Mrs. B 160 159M

The above weights include weight of chair and drawing-board (13% lb.).

It will be noted that there was an almost general reduction in weight after the seance, but that the medium lost only a quarter of a pound.

The reader will be interested to hear that at a circle held about a year previously with Mrs. Z, one of the voices, just before the breakup of the seance, gratuitously informed us that if we were to weigh the medium at the conclusion, we would find that she had lost 10 or more pounds due to the phenomena occurring during the evening. There is no doubt that the medium believed this herself; at any rate she mentioned it several times in the course of conversation. But it is all rubbish. The medium loses permanently very little weight ; less, indeed, than some of the sitters. And in this respect she is in line with all other mediums I have known.

I think the origin of the medium's belief that she lost 10 or more pounds in weight during one of her circles came about as follows : Some years ago in America telekinetic phenomena occurred through her; as a matter of fact a piano is said

to have moved across the room. She was weighed while this was happening and it was found that she lost a good many pounds. The medium immediately came to the rash conclusion that this loss of weight was permanent and she has since so informed all and sundry. Of course, the loss (supposing it to have taken place) was merely temporary and lasted only during the time the phenomenon was occurring. The reader who has followed my. experiments will know that these temporary fluctuations of weight seemingly occur during all phenomena of the telekinetic order.

But what are we to think of the voice (quite evidently a "direct" voice and not the voice of the medium either in or out of trance) which definitely declared that the medium permanently lost a great many pounds in weight? Did the voice belong to a sub-conscious part of Mrs. Z's ego masquerading as an independent entity, or did it really belong to an independent spirit? If the latter was the case, why did the spirit make incorrect statements in so fundamental a matter? If an independent spirit was speaking he must be very like unscientific people here who, in order to impress others, are not very careful or exact in their statements.

Returning to my experiments, the two trumpets were placed upright on the floor within the circle. The red light (obtained from a gas jet

enclosed in a large lantern having a sliding red glass front) was turned on full and the lantern was placed on a table at the end of the room farthest from the medium. Nothing happened for about a quarter of an hour. Then there were some raps on the floor and on the trumpets. In reply to questions the operators said (by raps) that the light was too strong. I went over to the lantern and turned the gas half down. A feeble voice, apparently emanating from near the ceiling within the circle space, was then heard saying, "Sing something." Soon the swish of what might have been the trumpets flying about in the air was heard (they could not, however, be seen) . The voice then said, "Turn the light round," i.e., the light was to be turned round so that it faced the wall, away from the circle and the medium. This voice is from the control, who is supposed to be a daughter of the medium who died many years ago and who now acts as chief guide or control at her mother's circles. Her voice is very much in evidence at all Mrs. Z's circles and it has a peculiar timbre not easily mistakable. The light was turned round as directed, which had the effect of making the room practically dark. There were then heard some facetious remarks from the control with regard to the experimental apparatus in the room and various voices spoke which gave names but no evidence of identity.

What I wished, however, was to see if the trumpets were really moving about in the air, as they seemed to be doing from the various directions in which the voices were speaking and from the peculiar way in which the trumpets apparently touched sitters in different parts of the circle. But it was now evident that only the feeblest light was possible with this medium. So I inserted a yellow screen in front of the red glass of the lantern which I again turned round facing the medium. (It is to be remembered that the lantern was on a table right outside the circle of sitters and perhaps seven feet distant from the medium.) The screen had the effect of practically extinguishing the light, there only remaining the dullest glow visible just in front of the lantern. Mr. M, who was holding the left hand of the medium, then said that he could see the trumpets moving in front of the lamp. I went over beside him and saw shadows crossing and re-crossing the dull glow produced by the light. These shadows seemed to be due to the trumpets, for their outlines were visible crossing both in a vertical position (sometimes small end up and sometimes large end) and in an inclined position.

At the conclusion of the seance when the lights were turned up, a fresh mark was found on the plaster of the ceiling of the room which would appear to have been made by the end of a trum-

pet. This mark was more than ten feet distant from the chair on which the medium wTas sitting. After the medium had departed we tried if it was possible to make such a mark fraudulently, even with the aid of both trumpets, but nobody could see how this was possible. (The small ends of the trumpets were of practically the same diameter and would not telescope into each other.) I may say also that I had heard voices speaking from the vicinity in which the mark was discovered.

During the whole stance Mr. M had hold of the medium's left hand. Mrs. A had her right hand, but this was occasionally free for a few seconds.

This stance showed that practically no phenomena could be obtained with this medium even in the feeblest of light. The trumpets could not even be made to move in the air round the room except in the dullest of dull glows. With Miss Goligher's mediumship the trumpets floated about in strong red light, and could be examined in detail (seeE.P.P.).

STANCE n

Date— Sunday, 21st April, 1918. Time 7.30-9.15 p. m.

Weights of medium and sitters just before and just after the seance :

Weights just before Weights Just after

stance — pounds seance — pouDds

Mrs. Z (medium). 2823^ 282M

Mr. R 188% 1883^

Mr. M jl763^ 176

Mrs. S 146 14414

Mrs. T 136% 136^

Mrs. A 141K 141

Mrs.Q... 145J4 145

The above weights include weight of chair and drawing-board (15% lb.). (The chair used at these seances was not always the same.)

Experiment to find the effect on the medium's weight while a voice was speaking.

The medium sat on a chair which rested upon a drawing-board placed on the platform of a weighing machine. The medium is a heavy woman and she found it difficult to make herself comfortable on the machine, yet she sat upon it for nearly an hour. I exactly balanced her weight so that the lever of the machine was just quivering between the stops. The machine just balanced at 282% lb. The two trumpets were placed upright on the floor within the circle. The medium sat with her hands on her knees. The lights were turned completely out and the seance commenced. I stood at the back of the machine with my right hand upon the lever, so that I was sensible of its slightest movement. With my left hand I felt the back of the medium from time to time.

Nothing happened for a quarter of an hour or

so. Then the lever of the machine fell lightly on the bottom stop, indicating that the medium's weight was decreasing. Very carefully I moved the rider back along the lever and obtained a new balance. Although it was dark this was quite easily accomplished by my sense of touch. The medium's original weight had balanced at 282% lb., so that the rider had been at the 2% lb. mark beyond zero on the scale. I found that by moving the rider almost exactly to zero that the lever just balanced again. The decrease in the medium's weight was, therefore, within an ounce of 2% lb. Immediately after I had surely obtained the new balance, the control's voice, issuing apparently from somewhere near the roof within the circle, cried out, "Weigh me," and a trumpet dropped with a crash to the floor within the circle. The medium's weight then immediately returned to the original value.

About a quarter of an hour later the same thing happened. The medium's weight suddenly decreased almost exactly 2% lb., the control's voice called out from near the ceiling, "Weigh me," a trumpet dropped with a crash to the floor, and the medium's weight immediately returned to normal.

The whole experiment was carried out in absolute darkness, only the senses of touch and hearing being of any use to the experimenter. What then are the chances that the decrease in the

medium's weight was due to genuine psychic action and not to fraud?

(a) With the exception of the occasion when

her weight decreased as described, there was absolutely no action on the weighing machine. The lever was very delicately balanced and I could note, by my sense of touch, if it moved the smallest amount. I am perfectly satisfied in my own mind that the medium, far from moving off the machine, or touching or pushing on or lifting extraneous bodies, hardly moved a muscle all the time she was sitting on the machine (possible exceptions, of course, being during the two periods of decreased weight). If she had done any of these things the delicately poised lever would have given it away. Moreover, the medium is a large heavy woman and any movements she would make, especially from the small platform of a weighing machine seven inches above the floor, would most likely be of a clumsy nature. Therefore, any fraud attempted was only during the periods of decreased weight.

(b) If the medium lifted a trumpet with a hand

or foot and held it out in the air, the weighing machine would register increase of weight equal to weight of trumpet. The

DIRECT VOICE PHENOMENA 18d

medium's weight, however, decreased on both occasions.

(c) If the medium put out a hand, grasped the

end of a trumpet and pressed the other end of the trumpet on the floor, her weight would decrease. In order, however, to make the decrease almost exactly 2% lb. on two separate occasions, she would need to have a very nice sense of touch.

(d) If acting fraudulently the medium, during

the period of the fraud, must have been doing something with the trumpet, for it crashed on the floor as soon as the voice spoke, and then immediately she regained her lost weight. It is certain she did not lift the trumpet clear of the floor at any time, for at no period was there the slightest increase in her weight. Yet the voice spoke from near the ceiling. If the trumpet had been pressed on the ceiling by the medium she would have gained weight, and during the time she was lifting it from floor to the ceiling she would have also gained weight. Taking it on the whole I am inclined to think the phenomenon was genuine and that the decrease in weight of 2y2 lb. was due to psychic action.

As practically no phenomena were forthcoming while the medium was sitting on the weigh-

ing machine (with the exception of those noted) I finally removed the machine and the medium sat on a chair placed on the floor. The medium said that the iron of the machine was hindering the production of phenomena. Voices in fair number then spoke, but nothing in the way of tests of identity was given.

I asked the control if during the experiment I had been weighing her or the trumpet. She did not seem to know, for she told me to "find out" for myself.

STANCE III

Date— Saturday, 27th April, 1918. Time 8.00-9.30 p. m.

Weights of medium and sitters just before and just after the seance :

Weights just before Weights just after

seance — pounds stance — pounds

Mrs. Z (medium) 2S6 2853^

Mrs. A 143 142^

Mr. M 1S23^ 1823^

Mr. U 15313 153H

Mr. W 15SJ^ 158}/S

Mrs. S 146% 1463^

Mrs. T 13SH 13SM

The above weights include the weight of chair and drawing-board (18% lb.).

Experiment to determine if the "direct voice" could be registered on a phonograph.

In order that the medium might not be able to move the trumpets with her feet, I devised an

electrical apparatus which effectually prevented this, A photograph of it is shown (fig. 29). It consists of a couple of flat boards hinged at their back ends to an un^er board which is screwed to the floor. An electrical contact device and springs are so arranged to each that normally the contacts are closed and an electric bell in the circuit rings. If a person sits on a chair and places a foot on each of the flat hinged boards the contacts are opened, due to the weight, and the bell ceases to ring. Each foot-rest operates independently. Between the two foot-rests is a vertical board sufficiently high to prevent one foot from being placed across both rests simultaneously. Many control tests showed that neither foot could be raised for an instant without the bell ringing.

When Mrs. Z came into the seance room and saw the foot electrical apparatus she seemed annoyed and nervous (I had not previously told her of it) . She said I should have made arrangements with her guides, i.e., spirit controls, before it was used. It took a lot of coaxing before she would consent to sit on a chair above the apparatus and put her feet on it.

A friend of mine, Mr. Stoupe, sat on her left and Mrs. Mills on her right throughout the whole seance. The medium placed a hand on each knee. A minute or two after the light was put out each of these sitters linked the little finger

of each of the medium's hands with their own hands, and I have their word that except during the times the light was subsequently lit (it was lit twice) they held tightly and that the medium's hands were never free. On the occasions upon which the light was temporarily lit I examined the situation and found each of the medium's hands properly gripped; in fact they were gripped so tightly that it was necessary, during the few minutes the light was on, to relax hands temporarily in order to give relief to the fingers of medium and sitters which had become cramped. But before the light was again extinguished the medium's hands were again tightly held.

As I have said, Mrs. Z, although obviously nervous and ill at ease, eventually submitted to all the test conditions. The trumpets were placed upright on the floor within the circle and the light was extinguished.

Within four minutes from the commencement the control's voice was heard from the air within the circle. I was surprised at this quick starting of phenomena, as at the previous stances they had been much slower in getting under way. Is it possible that the control, being a real spirit entity, desired to give her mother confidence and to show her that there was no reason for her nervousness? At any rate this was the effect

produced, for the medium immediately became quite cheerful.

The phonograph was resting on a table outside the circle of sitters, directly opposite the medium. The horn of the instrument was more than seven feet distant from her.

The control seemed to be in charge, so I explained that I wished her to bring the mouth of the trumpet through which the direct voice would speak, right up to the horn of the phonograph, as otherwise the voice might not be clearly reproduced. She rather discourteously replied that "she would do what she liked."

However, in a short time, she said she was ready. I told her to wait until she heard the buzzing of the machine and then to speak into it. Before I pulled the lever which started the machine (it was an Edison "Standard" kindly loaned me by Mr. Edens Osborne of Belfast), I asked the sitters on either side of the medium if they had tight hold of her hands and they replied in the affirmative. The cylinder had only made a few revolutions when the control commenced to sing a song into the horn. This song was three verses in length and at the end of each verse she interjected remarks such as "How's that," etc. I told her to sing a little louder, and during the third verse she sang quite loudly.

I plainly felt the movement of the air just at the mouth of the phonograph horn as the song

was being sung, which would seem to indicate that the end of the trumpet was moving to and fro at that spot. Moreover, the control's voice emanated from a position just at the mouth of the horn. I did not attempt to touch the trumpet as I knew from experience that if I did so it would be likely to drop. If an end of the trumpet was thus right at the mouth of the phonograph horn, as it appeared to be, the nearest distance of the other end of the trumpet from the medium must have been well over four feet. At the conclusion of the song and after I had stopped the instrument I asked the sitters on either side of the medium if they still had hold of her hands and they replied in the affirmative. These sitters afterwards told me that during the taking of the record the medium's hands were vibrating rapidly as though they were under great nervous stress.

Then occurred the incident of the silk coat (discussed later).

The control asked that the light be turned on, which was done. I tried the record and found the voice satisfactorily recorded.

Another blank record was put on the machine, the medium's hands were held and the light was put out. The control, at my request, this time spoke into the horn of the phonograph, instead of singing, and again the voice was recorded.

There is internal evidence in the records them-

selves, that the voice must have been speaking right into the horn of the phonograph and not from some distance away. Amongst people who are continually making records it is well known that if the voice to be recorded speaks too close into the horn a kind of tinny, metallic sound is produced which spoils the quality of the reproduced voice. Phonograph manufacturers call this effect "blasting." In several places in the two records of the control's voice this metallic "blasting" is heard, indicating that the voice must have been very close to, if not indeed within, the horn of the phonograph.

At the conclusion of the experiment the electrical foot apparatus was tested and was found to be working perfectly.

THE COAT INCIDENT

At the commencement of the seance the medium wore a knitted silk coat having sleeves reaching down to the wrist. There was a silk belt fastened round it at the waist.

Just after the first phonographic record had been taken I heard a peculiar f ussling noise near me (on the side of the circle remote from the medium). When the light was turned on, the coat and belt were found neatly hung over the arm of one of the men (Mr. W) sitting opposite the medium and perhaps five feet distant from

196 ^EXPERIMENTS IN PSYCHICAL SCIENCE

her. They had previously landed on Mr& T's hands and had then seemed to take a leap on to the gentleman's arm (so at least says Mrs. T). One sleeve of the coat was found turned outside in. The belt was found undone and separate from the coat. At the time the coat was thrown or lifted on to Mr. W's arm, both Mrs. Mills and Mr. Stoupe were holding one of the medium's hands and her feet were on the electrical apparatus. But there was a minute or two at the beginning of the seance, while the hands of everybody were supposed to be resting on knees, during which the medium's hands were free. Hence there is nothing to test conditions about this incident and I only relate it as a matter of interest.

STANCE IV

Date— Sunday, 28th April, 1918 Time 7.30-9.00 p. m.

Weights of sitters just before and just after the seance :

Weights Just before^Weights Just after

seance — pounds stance — pounds

Mrs. Z (medium)

Mrs. A 1411 1416

Mr. M 180 179%

Mr. W 159 159

Mr. U 153^ 153H

Mrs. Q 148% . 148%

Mrs.P 144% 144%

The above weights include the weight of chair and drawing-board (18% lb.)V

There was very little phenomena at this stance and the reader should note that the decreases in weight of the sitters are not so marked as in previous sittings.

Experiment with a photographic plate.

The medium held a dark slide containing a half plate in her hands for about half-an-hour. There were noises as though the slide was being opened and closed, and the medium may have been doing this. The control's voice was heard saying that she was trying to put something on the plate.

Result: Negative. Nothing whatever on the plate.

Experiment with curtain rings*

Two wooden curtain rings were placed on the floor with a request to the operators to interlock them. (This would have amounted to the penetration of solid matter by solid matter.) Result: Negative.

Experiment with clay in sealed box.

A wooden box about 12 inches square and 4 inches high was used. Into this some modeller's clay was placed and nicely smoothed. The lid was then placed on it and the whole roped and sealed. The operators were asked to make an impression on the clay inside the box without breaking the seals. Result: Negative.

The Municipal Technical Institute, Belfast, 6th May, 1918. I hereby declare that during the whole time the control was singing and speaking into the phonograph, I had firm hold of Mrs. Z's left hand. Her hand was resting on her knee and my little finger was tightly twisted round her little finger. Dr. Crawford asked me just before each phonograph record was taken and just after it was taken if I was sure I had tight hold. I replied that I was sure.

(Signed) Seamus Stoupe.

Bray, Co. Wicklow, 7th May, 1918. I hereby declare that during the whole time the control was singing and speaking into the phonograph, I had firm hold of Mrs. Z's right hand. Her hand was resting on her knee and my little finger was tightly twisted round her little finger. Dr. Crawford asked me just before each phonograph record was taken and just after it was taken if I was sure I had tight hold. I replied that I was sure.

(Signed) Marian Mills.

