We shared her feelings, and on June 19, 20, and 21, the whole convent was hung with garlands of leaves and roses, escutcheons, and scrolls inscribed with thanksgivings or quotations from the words of the servant of God, preparations for illuminations, etc.

His Lordship Monseigneur Lemonnier, our Bishop, Monseigneur de Teil, and all the reverend members of the ecclesiastical tribunal honoured us with a visit on the first day to admire our decorations and rejoice with us. In the community-room the novices, as our representatives, sang some verses of thanks composed by their mistress and recited with great feeling the whole poem of "The little Way." Monseigneur added a kind word about our dear Sub-Prioress who was absent.

Holy Communion was taken to her each day through our flower-wreathed cloisters; two postulants in white dresses threw blossoms before the Blessed Sacrament and the invalid's bed was strewn with roses.

This reminded her of a dream she had had two years before in which she saw a coffin carried by novices and two postulants robed in white pass through our cloisters, garlanded with flowers and foliage. She was struck by the coincidence, which made her think her death was very near.

This was in fact the case. Towards the beginning of March, Mother Sub-Prioress was in a very weak state, owing to her violent perspiration, fever, and hemorrhage. As the latter became more serious through the frequency of the attacks and the fever ran very high, it was thought wise to administer the last Sacraments to her on Friday, July 11. Her sufferings, hitherto not very severe, soon became much more acute. Repeated attacks of hemorrhage caused the most painful sense of suffocation, accompanied by a burning thirst which never left her until she died. Edema of the chest supervened, accompanied with terrible spasms of the heart, and, patient and peaceful as she had always been in the past, she begged us now with tears to pray for her.

We made her inhale oxygen, but its effects lasted but a very short time, and powerless as we were to soothe her anguish we were almost relieved when, on the eve of her death, her devoted doctor told us that probably she would not live through the night.

She was greatly consoled during that day, July 29, on receiving, through the Reverend Father Rodriguez, postulator of our Cause, a few lines from our Holy Father, Pope Pius X, giving us his blessing "in the humble expectation that the Most High would make known His will concerning the servant of God, Teresa of the Child Jesus."

Our dear daughter seized the precious autograph and kissed it fervently.

In the evening, when the community assembled round her bed, she remembered that she had not been able to beg pardon of her sisters, as her condition had necessitated absolute silence. She now performed that act of humility in the most lowly and touching manner, thanking us affectionately for "the extreme care that had been taken of her, and for the kindness with which we had borne with a poor invalid Sub-Prioress."

The calm and peaceful evening was followed by a very restless night, and she suffered severely at intervals during the whole of the next day.


HER SAINTLY DEATH

"I entreat Thee to let Thy divine eyes rest upon a vast number of Little Souls, I entreat Thee to choose, in this world, a legion of Little Victims of Thy Love." - Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus

Towards evening, the community assembled in Mother Isabel's cell to pray for her as they had the day before, and the night of her last hours drew on. Towards morning on Friday, July 31, at about three o' clock, her symptoms made us summon the nuns hurriedly. How she edified us! It would take too long to recount all the touching words she said and we should find it difficult to describe our feelings as we stood beside the "little child," as indeed she seemed to be a frank and gracious child about to cast itself into the arms of its Father without any anxiety or the slightest fear of His judgments, for "little children do not lose their souls."

"I am in a very good state to die in," she said, smiling, at about six o'clock in the morning: "I am going to die! I am going to see the good God! Oh! What a solemn moment!"

We asked her whether she would like to see our extraordinary confessor, as our chaplain was absent, but she answered simply that she felt no need for it. She had been to confession two days before and had received the Holy Viaticum from our Father Superior.

Her agony continued for some time; she seemed to suffer severely and at last she sighed -and said: "What a long while it lasts! What shall I do?" Then after a short silence she turned to us and said: "I have been thinking about priests," meaning that she had been offering her sufferings for them.

Then she asked, when she would be happy? On our answering: "In a few minutes," her face became radiant and she exclaimed: "Oh! Is it true. Mother! Then I will do nothing but make acts of love." And, taking up her crucifix she kissed it, holding it firmly in her hands. "My God, I Love Thee!" she repeated: "I long for Jesus! Jesus! Come quickly!"

After a pause, she exclaimed: "How I love the Blessed Virgin, too! Saint Joseph, too! Little Teresa, too! and all the Saints who had a special love for God, too!" She put a peculiar and tender emphasis upon the word "too" which cannot be described. What expression there was in her voice as she said:

"Mother, remind me of the graces that God has poured upon me! tell me what singular love He has shown me." She repeated "singular." "Recount what He has done for His poor little creatures. Oh! How I love Him, I wish to die blessing Him." Her face wore a beautiful expression that was new to it. There was something poetic in the dignity of the moment, like a note of heavenly music.

The eyes of the dying saint looked through the open window opposite and seemed to penetrate the secrets of the heavens. She could see the rising sun gilding the dome of our chapel. We never recall that look without thinking of the lines from Divine Love:

The sun-rise brightens and new light Has swiftly caused the day to shine;

Time flies and I have reached Love's noon And looked on Thee, O Sun divine!

Now, lightened by Thy purest rays Mine eyes within Thy Heart can gaze.

The bell rang for the conventual Mass and some of the sisters regretfully went away, leaving the gentle victim of " love and thanksgiving," whose sacrifice seemed nearly consummated.

Just before the Sanctus bell she closed her eyes and spoke no more. The infirmarian, who had often noticed how absorbed the invalid appeared between the two elevations at Mass, begged our little saint in a whisper to pray that at that instant of her last Mass the dying nun might depart. Her prayer was granted: at the moment the first bell sounded her gasping but regular breathing suddenly became slower and at the second ringing, at the elevation of the chalice, she died quietly.

Her age was thirty-two years and six months, of which she had spent ten years, six months, and eighteen days in Carmel.

Next day when she lay exposed before the choir grille surrounded with flowers where her father came to weep and pray for a long while - we learnt that war was imminent.

One of the wreaths of white flowers fastened by a tri-colour ribbon lying at the foot of the coffin bore this inscription:

"The chaplains and soldiers of the Oeuvres militaires Catholiques of Normandy."

"May Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus and Mother Isabel of the Sacred Heart obtain for us grace to do our duty generously as servants of Christ and France!"

We felt sure that France might count that day upon a powerful intercessor, another advocate in heaven!

She had written: "Now I repeat, in my turn: I am restrained now, my victories will come after death: I will rain down light and fire: I will form a trio with Teresa and Marie-Ange and will help them until the end of the world to make Love beloved."

Again she wrote:

"I shall soon see our dear saint for the first time and shall learn from Jesus all that she has done for me. I suspect that it is to her I owe my conversion and all the graces that followed it, including those of knowing her, loving her, wishing to imitate her and to enter her Carmel, of following in her footsteps, and soon, I hope, of dying absorbed in love as she died. There is no doubt that 1 am one of the souls she has most dearly loved and cared for, yet I have never had the childlike feeling towards her usual with those she specially protects; I consider myself as her little Sister, and I believe she has chosen me to help her in her mission of making God loved in an entirely new manner.

"A long while ago, after the death of Mother Marie-Ange, when I heard of our little seraphim's prophecy about the "little souls" who would fulfill her mission by glorifying her "way", I thought that I should be one of those souls, and that with Teresa and Marie-Ange, I should form a little trinity which would always act together and for the same object: that I should share their happiness and glory, and should attract hearts to the "little way" by revealing to them the divine loving-kindness."

A few days after her death, one of our sisters was much struck by seeing after Matins an immense star, or rather a sun, over our Carmel, sheltering beneath it two smaller but equally brilliant stars with which it formed a triangle as it shed its rays over that part of the convent in which Mother Isabel had died.

The sister's cell was lighted for a quarter of an hour by the symbolic meteor and although she knew nothing of the hues quoted above, she burst into tears as she thought to herself: "It is our little saint with Mother Isabel and Mother MarieAnge!"

In one of her poems, Mother Isabel had made Sister Teresa say:

And I, as sun, shall bring forth other orbs.

Thus, born from me, still other saints shall shine Within the vault of heaven.

It has been a consolation to receive many precious tributes in favour of our dear daughter, especially the following lines from the Archbishop of X—, who after having made a pilgrimage to our Carmel kept up a special intercourse of mutual prayer with his "dear spiritual sister", Isabel of the Sacred Heart.

"By a touching favour" writes His Grace, the two saints, Teresa of the Child Jesus and "Isabel of the Sacred Heart rarely leave me. I invoke them several times a day and feel that they are near me. I shall have two graves to visit now when I am able to go to Lisieux."

Monseigneur Lemonnier wished that the principal members of the ecclesiastical tribunal residing at Bayeux should be present at the funeral. Our venerated and devoted Postulator, Monseigneur de Teil, would also have been there, but they were all unavoidably prevented. However, the ceremony was affecting in its simplicity. After the Mass celebrated by our Father-Superior and the absolutions pronounced by the canons of Lisieux, the open coffin was borne through the cloisters by our two postulants and the novitiate. It was the fulfillment of the mysterious dream

before-mentioned, for though the cloisters were not actually garlanded with flowers, the festivities seemed to have been but of yesterday.

Since that day, Monday, August 3, the body of Mother Isabel of the Sacred Heart has lain in the cemetery of Lisieux between Teresa of the Child Jesus and Mother Marie-Ange.

We feel full confidence in the heavenly "Trio".

- From our convent of the Carmelites of Lisieux, dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and to the Immaculate Conception of our Lady.

- Sister Agnes of Jesus, Prioress


* * *


SOURCES

Source: Mother Isabel of the Sacred Heart, by Sister Agnes of Jesus (printed London, 1916) — Internet Archive `mother-isabel-of-the-sacred-heart` (public domain). Diligence note: as printed, the book's title credits its author only by her religious name, 'by Sister Agnes of Jesus'; the surname here (Pauline Martin, Prioress of the Carmel of Lisieux) is given from the book's own signature ('Sister Agnes of Jesus, Prioress of the Carmel') and unimpeachable Carmel records. Reprint prepared 2026-10-08.

