THE DIVINING ROD, THE EXPLORER PENDULUM, AND TURNING TABLES

by Michel-Eugène Chevreul (1786–1889)

Basis: Fresh English translation, made for this edition, of Michel-Eugène Chevreul's De la baguette divinatoire, du pendule dit explorateur et des tables tournantes (Paris: Mallet-Bachelier, 1854; Internet Archive delabaguettedivi00chev), the classic skeptical account of dowsing, the hand-held pendulum, and table-turning. A small number of discursive historical chapters are rendered in close condensed English, marked with brackets in the text; no complete English translation of this work was found after research.

Reader note: Chevreul's 1833 letter to Ampère is reproduced in full in Part Two; it contains the blindfold experiments from which his principle — that a thought can become a muscular movement without the will's knowledge — was drawn.

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

OF THE DIVINING ROD, OF THE PENDULUM CALLED EXPLORER, AND OF TURNING TABLES

BY M.-E. CHEVREUL, MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE

PARIS: MALLET-BACHELIER, 1854

[First English edition: translated from the French of 1854]

OF THE DIVINING ROD, OF THE PENDULUM CALLED EXPLORER, AND OF TURNING TABLES



Contents

Introduction: General considerations on the occult sciences, the sciences of the domain of natural philosophy, and the experimental method

Part One: The Divining Rod

- Chapter I. Citations from the Bible where the rod is in question - Chapter II. Of the rod or staff in antiquity - Chapter III. Of the use of the rod from the fifteenth century to 1689 - Chapter IV. Of the use of the rod from 1689 to 1702 - Chapter V. Of the use of the rod from 1702 to our own day. General conclusion relative to the rod

Part Two: Of the Pendulum Called Explorer

- Chapter I. Of the pendulum called explorer from antiquity to 1798 - Chapter II. Of the explorer pendulum from 1798 to 1808 - Chapter III. Of the experimental researches of Gerboin on the explorer pendulum - Chapter IV. Of the researches of M. Chevreul on the pendulum called explorer. Letter of M. E. Chevreul to M. Ampère, on a particular class of muscular movements; L'Hay, near Paris, 23 March 1833

Part Three: Of Turning Tables and of Striking or Speaking Tables

- § I. Of turning tables - § II. Of striking or speaking tables. A. Phenomena of acoustics. B. Phenomena of translation. C. Optical phenomena. D. Intellectual phenomena. Of spirits. Of mediums

Part Four: Theory and Conclusions of the Facts Set Forth in the First Three Parts

- Chapter I. Exposition of the principle of M. Chevreul concerning a particular class of muscular movements - Chapter II. Application of the principle of the explorer pendulum to experiments made before 1812 with that pendulum - Chapter III. Application of the principle of the explorer pendulum to the simple movement of the rod. History of Mlle Ollivet. History of Mlle Martin. History of Prior Barde, of M. du Pernan, canon of Saint-Chef, and of M. Expié - Chapter IV. Application of the principle of the explorer pendulum to the movement of the rod used as a means of divination - Chapter V. Application of the principle of the explorer pendulum to the movement of turning tables - Chapter VI. Application of the principle of the explorer pendulum to the movement of striking or speaking tables. Final considerations of Part Four

Part Five: Intervention of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum in a Great Number of Acts of Human Life

- Introduction. I. Acts relating to instinct. II. Acts relating to reason. III. Acts relating to imitation. IV. Acts relating to habit - Chapter I. Influence of the sight of a body in movement on our own body - Chapter II. Of the intervention of the principle of the explorer pendulum with the stability of our own body. In a narrow pathway. Cause of seasickness - Chapter III. Relation of the principle of the explorer pendulum with imitation - Chapter IV. Of the influence of faith and of certain predispositions on certain acts of human life - Chapter V. Influence of the principle of the explorer pendulum on certain acts in the life of animals. Final reflections



Introduction: General Considerations on the Occult Sciences, the Sciences of the Domain of Natural Philosophy, and the Experimental Method

1. On the 1st of March 1853 the Academy named a Commission of three members, MM. Chevreul, Boussingault, and Babinet, to examine a Memoir by M. Riondet (of Var) on the divining rod employed in searching for underground waters; my two colleagues charged me with the Report. Soon afterwards turning tables occupied the French public, and a Letter in which M. Kœppelin (of Colmar) spoke of them to the Academy was referred to our examination. A Report seemed to me then so much the easier to make because some organs of the daily press, in entertaining their readers with these marvellous phenomena, cited as applicable to their explanation a large part of the Letter on a particular class of muscular movements which I had addressed to M. Ampère, and which was printed in 1833 in the Revue des Deux-Mondes. Certainly, if the phenomenon of turning tables had been restricted to their circular movement, fortified by the public assent of several persons to whom I am unknown and whose judgment I may on that account believe impartial, I should without fear have submitted conclusions to my two honourable colleagues of the Commission, and, supposing them approved, should without hesitation have presented them to the sanction of the Academy.

2. But the tables have not only turned; they have struck with the foot — or, to speak more exactly, they have spoken, have seen the past, perceived what is at present in distant places, and even future events have been unveiled to them. It is no longer a few light writings, a few newspaper articles, of which they have been the object; the recital of their numerous marvels has given birth to volumes! Nor, lastly, are the tables exclusively the seat of intelligence. Guadeloupe possesses a chair endowed with the faculty of composing in prose and in verse, as a brochure deposited in the Library of the Institute testifies. I reproduce its exact title in a note: Juanita, a tale by a Chair, followed by a proverb and some chosen works by the same author, and preceded by a Preface by the Editor on the Phenomenon of Moving Tables. "The literary works of the Chair are but the preface of a mysterious book which she will unfold page by page before the dazzled eyes of believers." (Epilogue, p. 63.) On sale: Government Printing Office, Basse-Terre (Guadeloupe), 1853.

3. The beliefs of the Middle Ages in astrology, in magic, in sorcerers, have been evoked as the expression of pure truth, while the scientific truths acquired since Galileo by the a posteriori method, sacrificed to the former, have been diminished when they have not been contested. To rehabilitate ancient beliefs, no resource of dialectic has seemed superfluous; every argument has been employed. Natural philosophy has been humiliated by being represented with its eyes closed to the marvellous of the Middle Ages, leading men into error along the roads it had opened. The torture of fire inflicted on men and women suspected of sorcery has been justified in principle and in fact. If it has not been said that she who freed France from the foreign yoke was justly condemned to be burned alive as a sorceress, an attempt has at least been made to show the majority of her judges guided by true principles, because, it has been said, the proof was established at the trial that Joan of Arc had carried bouquets to the fairies' tree.

4. In reading some recent writings against the positive sciences whose principles can be demonstrated true, and against the men of science who cultivate them, one is struck by their authors' manner of reasoning. Speaking of the mind and its activity, they rightly attribute to it the faculty of knowing itself by reflection, of discerning good from evil, of defining the just and the beautiful; but they err in disdaining, with affectation even, matter, which they consider as something absolutely passive, whose study is of no real importance for the knowledge of the world. In their eyes, then, mind is everything and matter nothing; the first represents force, movement, life, intelligence; the second, immobility, death, nothingness. The contemplation of the mind and its faculties elevates whoever gives himself to it, while the study of matter and its properties lowers whoever occupies himself with it. It is from this absolute manner of seeing, or one somewhat mitigated, that flow those unfavourable judgments on the positive sciences, on the academies instituted to assure their progress, and on the men of science occupied with their culture.

5. But can the mind that disdains the study of this matter — which in the visible world falls under our senses and affects them so diversely, whether it be living or inorganic — really dispense with it when it displays the pretension of knowing man? No, doubtless, for our nature is double: to the spiritual substance which animates it a material substance is intimately united. Two principles are therefore to be known; consequently, whatever the importance of the first, the study of the second is no less necessary, and to undertake it with success one must unite the notions drawn from all the sources of human knowledge whose ensemble constitutes natural philosophy.

6. What becomes of the mind which, abstracting from matter, delights in itself without taking account of the realities of the visible world? Prey to reverie, the marvellous and the supernatural alone touch it; absorbed in the contemplation of the invisible world, it is the perpetual plaything of illusions and phantoms created for it by an imagination outside reason, and which, succeeding one another with the rapidity of a fevered man's dreams, often have madness for their term.

7. Happily, many religious minds and theologians are opposed to this manner of seeing. I shall cite as examples Father Pierre Lebrun, of the Oratory, author of the Critical History of the Superstitious Practices That Have Seduced Peoples and Embarrassed the Learned, and also the doctors of the Sorbonne charged with the examination of the book. Father Lebrun, who published that work in 1702, was one of those minds as modest as they are elevated, curious for the approval of all who love truth; thus, after having submitted the book whose title I recall to theologians capable of attesting the purity of his faith and the orthodoxy of his religious opinions, he had addressed it to the Royal Academy of Sciences to have its judgment on what concerns science properly so called; and it is not without a feeling of profound esteem for the author's memory that, after the approbations of the theologians, doctors of the Sorbonne, I read the judgment pronounced by a Commission of the Academy composed of the metaphysician Malebranche, the geometer La Hire, the physician Dodart, and the witty Fontenelle.

8. Every time the religious mind has appealed to natural philosophy, the science of Galileo, of Descartes, of Newton, of Leibnitz has not shown itself atheist; and when the highest religious genius of modern times, Bossuet, was called to instruct the son of the king who until then had been the most powerful as well as the most absolute of monarchs, he composed that admirable book Of the Knowledge of God and of Oneself, in which he rendered to the sciences of the visible world the most precious homage they have ever received from any man. For the author of that book, what is the knowledge of oneself? It is not only to know the attributes which establish the divine origin of our spiritual substance; it is to know, besides, everything attaching to the knowledge of our material substance; and it is thus that the illustrious author intends to make man known to him whom he instructs to succeed Louis XIV. That book charms by the clarity of the exposition, the science of the details, and the grandeur of the images; after reading it, one is seized with admiration in thinking of the time Bossuet gave to the study of what so many people disdain today, believing themselves probably more spiritualist than him whom we have so justly named the last Father of the Church! A second example. Did the venerable Bishop of Hermopolis lose precious time for the object of his Conferences in addressing himself to men of science as well as to their books when he wished to know an entirely new science, Geology; had he cause to accuse science of materialism after the arguments he had been able to draw from it in support of the doctrines he preached to his numerous hearers?

9. How regrettable it is that in the eighteenth century Bossuet had no successors versed in the knowledge of the positive sciences and capable of discussing questions that men pretended to resolve in the name of philosophy, and which, as we know today, were frequently resolved in a sense contrary to truth. See, for example, Helvétius maintaining the equality of men's aptitudes; Rousseau reasoning from the supposition that man degenerates in society from the moral point of view as well as from the physical; Condillac explaining the instinct of animals by imitation or by a transmission from ancestors to their young! Who could assure us that the result of a free, serious, and prolonged discussion would not then have enlightened more than one mind seduced by hypotheses it believed to be truths?

10. Man, with his faculties so excessively limited when considered in relation to the discovery of absolute truth, finds himself, in everything he must know, between the reef of extreme credulity and that of extreme doubt. The theologians fixed their attention on this state of things in what lies outside the sacred traditions or the domain of faith. For example, when there was question of the divining rod from 1689 to 1702, it was examined, in the case where it gave just indications, whether it was not the organ of God, or of an angel, or of Satan. Father Ménestrier, author of the Philosophy of Enigmatic Images (1694), sought to demonstrate that it was under the influence of Satan, because, he said, no tradition had announced, nor even given grounds to infer, that one day a rod would manifest to man the word of God or of an angel. Father Lebrun, who a year before Father Ménestrier had professed the same opinion, returned to it in 1702 in his Critical History of the Superstitious Practices That Have Seduced Peoples and Embarrassed the Learned; not only did he maintain it anew, but he proscribed the judicial ordeals of fire, of water, of the duel, etc., as superstitions which could not in any case enlighten justice; in this he found himself again in agreement with Father Ménestrier.

11. If, because Fathers Lebrun and Ménestrier attributed the movement of the rod to Satan, we considered them credulous people, repugning to use their reason to discuss the probability of propositions advanced as truths, we should be much mistaken; for it is impossible to reason better than Father Lebrun does when he seeks to prove that no material substance acts on the rod, and that its movement depends on a free and intelligent cause. All who take account of the difference of the times, of the influence of the progress of the positive sciences for more than a century and a half, and above all of the extreme credulity of a great number of our contemporaries, will doubtless share the judgment I express here on Father Lebrun. Father Ménestrier shows no less reason in a writing on the divining rod when he treats the question whether one could have recourse to it in criminal trials to distinguish the guilty from the innocent.

12. Natural philosophy, resting entirely on principles demonstrated by reasoning, is bound in its researches and examinations by no article of faith. Everything there is of the domain of discussion, and of a perfectly free discussion; the progress of science requires it. But each body of doctrine has been established on facts which the method has generalized into principles, after having established the exactness of each of them. Freedom of examination and discussion, with the method that weighs facts and lays down principles, have therefore created natural philosophy.

13. When antiquity and the Middle Ages occupied themselves with knowledge within the province of this philosophy, but not belonging to pure mathematics, that knowledge was envisaged somewhat after the manner of religious things; the master gave it to submissive pupils as articles of faith, conformably to the a priori method. The latter rests therefore on the principle of authority; it commands the submission of the mind, and faith is a condition for whoever wishes to learn.

14. Natural philosophy has only progressed after the epoch when the a priori method was definitively replaced by the a posteriori method, whose basis is free examination. It dates from Galileo, who had the imperishable glory of having joined example to precept. Less ambitious than the a priori method, it does not start from the first cause to establish as consequence the effects or phenomena to be explained, but ascends from the phenomenon to its immediate cause. With its principle of free examination, it lives by discussion — not of vain words, but of arguments drawn from the observation of natural facts. One consequence of the practice of this method has been the institution of academies, where the equality of the academicians permits freedom of discussion, since there is no other authority than the president, charged with maintaining rules made precisely to assure that freedom to all.

15. Let us see the reproaches made to the a posteriori method and to the academies. It is with the faculties of the mind as with the faculties of the body: exercise develops them and creates habits. If the habits of an individual's mind are favourable to certain intellectual works, to facilitating certain researches, certain studies…

15 (continued). …exposed to certain studies, they are very useful to the man of science; but habits unfavourable to other kinds of work may harm him if he is engaged in research of that kind. If this is so for an individual, what shall we say of a body, of a company, which gives itself to certain studies? Let us suppose an academy recognised by the State to occupy itself with the progress of physics, chemistry, mineralogy, geology, botany, zoology, etc., and in which those of its members who resist the progress of these sciences should count for something. Would any serious teaching of the applied and progressive sciences exist? No, assuredly: the a posteriori method requires of its adepts that they consecrate themselves to study and progress, and not that they busy themselves resisting what must advance.

16. It is said that the a posteriori method, in neglecting the a priori, impoverishes the mind in refusing it the free play of its faculties: this reproach is unfounded. The a priori arguments by which one seeks to prove the truth of a proposition are legitimate when they serve to establish the exactitude of a fact; they are inadmissible when they replace it, for a fact is needed before reasoning on it can be legitimate. Man is so made that the imagination can easily impose illusions on him; that is why reasoning a priori, separated from verification, is a permanent cause of error.

17. I go further. For reflective minds devoted to the culture of knowledge foreign to natural philosophy, the study of the a posteriori method, such as I have defined it as the experimental method, cannot be otherwise than extremely fruitful, for the very reason that it continually shows the surest way to arrive at truth. Does a phenomenon depending on natural philosophy, observed in nature, a workshop, a physics cabinet, a chemistry laboratory, awaken the attention of a man of science so as to engage him in seeking the cause of the phenomenon? His mind reasons, gives itself to inductions and conjectures according to the relations he thinks he perceives between this phenomenon and what he knows; but these inductions and conjectures are only hypotheses so long as there has been no verification. Now it is this verification which engages him to institute experiments whose definitive aim is to make the inductions and conjectures pass from the state of hypothesis to that of demonstrated facts, or else to have them rejected as error. In this last case, new inductions and new conjectures lead to instituting new experiments. It is therefore, in the last resort, experience which serves as control to reasonings deduced from observation; hence the expression experimental method.

18. The experimental method is not applicable only to the sciences of observation, reasoning, and experience, such as physics and chemistry; it applies also to the sciences of observation and reasoning, such as botany, zoology, etc. For example, the more living bodies are studied from the standpoint of natural history, the more the need will be felt, in the determination of species, to institute experiments proper to confirm or reject certain opinions which today rest on no precise fact.

19. There are other sciences, such as ancient history viewed critically, political economy, statistics, to which experience seems today foreign, but which will one day have recourse to it with advantage. Meanwhile, one cannot fail to recognise, in more than one remarkable work of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres, the spirit of the experimental method. Thus propositions are put forward as conclusions from a way of envisaging certain facts taken as the object of study. Then these propositions are demonstrated true by incontestable facts cited in support. Evidently, these facts, serving as control to the propositions, correspond perfectly to the facts deduced from experience when it is a question of researches belonging to the sciences of observation, reasoning, and experience.

20. A final reflection will close these general considerations which I have thought necessary before treating the special question of the explanation of the movement of the explorer pendulum and of the divining rod. The a posteriori method admitting as truth only what can be demonstrated such, it follows that an author who advances a proposition without demonstrating it must blame himself if it is not adopted, for to him falls the task of proving what he advances. But if the proposition is true, though undemonstrated, sooner or later it will be recognised, and then that proposition will itself serve to discover some other truth. There will therefore be advancement of science, or progress. Such is the march of true science: what is recognised as true necessarily has, sooner or later, as consequence the discovery of new truths, and in natural philosophy a truth is never long unrecognised.

21. Now, how are we to conceive that capital facts recognised as true in the Middle Ages would have been set aside, then forgotten, because their knowledge had led to no new truth, though reputed for centuries real truths? That, I confess, is what I find it hard to understand. Yet this difficulty I do not raise as a hypothesis; it is real. Persons who have faith in speaking tables await the most brilliant and unexpected discoveries from these marvels which they believe absolutely new: well, they must know that, far from that, all these marvels were described as early as 1693, 1694, and 1702 by Fathers Lebrun and Ménestrier, with this sole difference, that their organs were not tables but the rod or the explorer pendulum, as will be seen in the course of this work. What then becomes of those hopes of seeing a sort of new world hatch, which will engender marvels far more astonishing than those we owe to the sciences of the visible world? Certainly, let impartial minds weigh the observation I make, and they will see that it expresses a really grave difficulty, which men professing the a posteriori method raise against the reality of the marvels spoken of today. (It was on 1 February 1854 that I communicated to the Academy the considerations forming the matter of this Introduction.)

22. The silence the Academy of Sciences has kept until now on turning tables has been interpreted unfavourably by writers professing the opinions I have just combated; and, after reading their writings, I have lost the thought of making a Report on these new phenomena. In fact, the explanation I gave more than twenty years ago of the oscillations of the pendulum called explorer — which at the beginning of the century was a subject of numerous experiments for Fortis, Charles Amoretti, and above all Gerboin, professor at the Special School of Medicine at Strasbourg — that explanation, I say, applied by others than myself to the phenomena of turning tables, having raised some criticism, it is wholly evident that a judgment on my part in this circumstance would have been suspect, and that I should have failed in all propriety in presenting to two of my colleagues, then to the Academy, conclusions in which it could have been said that the reporter was at once judge and party. But, strong in an opinion whose certainty is in my conscience as an honest man and a man of science, I do not hesitate to produce in the Academy and outside it an explanation of the explorer pendulum which was not formerly submitted to it; I shall develop it more than I had done, both in its statement and in its consequences; I shall also apply myself to showing that this explanation is, as I had suspected, applicable to the divining rod.

23. Two motives impose on me the law of being very reserved concerning turning tables: one concerns the Academy of Sciences, to which I have the honour to belong for twenty-eight years, and the other is absolutely personal to me.

24. First motive. — When I thought I could speak of this phenomenon as reporter of a Commission named by the Academy, my intention had always been to entertain it only with a simple circular movement said to be imparted to tables by the apposition of hands; but today, when it is a question of phenomena wholly outside the domain of the sciences with which it occupies itself, it is my duty not to exceed their limits. I shall therefore confine myself in this work to speaking of the analogies that may be perceived between the phenomena of the explorer pendulum, of the divining rod, and of exclusively turning tables.

25. Second motive. — The second motive, though wholly personal, commands me no less imperiously to the same reserve. I have said it long ago, and often repeated: the aim of my life has been the study of the method by which man arrives at the knowledge of the unknown in the natural sciences, rather than the making of discoveries properly so called. I believe I have defined the experimental method in a way to give a more precise idea of the a posteriori method and of the a priori method than had been done before me, because my definition opposes giving henceforth to these expressions, as has already happened, a sense they do not have.

26. The a priori method, essentially dogmatic, envisaged from the most absolute standpoint, such as it dominated in antiquity and the Middle Ages until Galileo, constantly put forward principles which it did not hold to proving, because, according to it, they emanated from a true doctrine that could not be called in question.

27. Teaching, envisaged according to whether it proceeds from principles to consequences or from facts to principles, is synthetic or analytic; it is not to be confused with the methods themselves. If one reads the introduction to the Principles of Comparative Anatomy of M. de Blainville, one sees that the illustrious naturalist confused the a priori method with synthetic teaching, and the a posteriori method with analytic teaching, and that when he believed he was demonstrating a thing by the a priori method, it was really by proceeding through the synthetic teaching of facts gathered by the a posteriori method that he did so.

28. After this short summary of the way in which I envisage method, it would be in my eyes an unpardonable fault, and a great inconsistency toward the public, if I — who have occupied myself in an accessory manner with turning tables and have not had the occasion to admire the sublime intelligence of striking tables, nor their divinatory faculty — were to emit doubts on the capacity of these marvellous agents, as well as on the probity, gravity, and lights of their interpreters, who number today, they assure us, in the millions, in every part of the civilised world. In this state of things I shall not expose myself to being told that the first condition to fulfil in any scientific work being to have oneself studied, and for a sufficient time, what one wishes to explain, I have, at the end of my career, failed in the experimental method which until then had never ceased to guide me.

29. The facts with which I shall occupy myself belong to three distinct categories: 1° Those concerning the divining rod; they are the most ancient. 2° The facts relating to the movement of a pendulum held in the hand above certain bodies; it is this pendulum, composed of a heavy matter and a flexible thread, that has sometimes been qualified as explorer. If facts of this category were known long ago, one scarcely began to examine them in a special manner until the first twelve years of this century. 3° The facts concerning the ordinarily circular movement imparted to a table, to a hat, etc., by several persons whose fingers touch. Knowledge of these facts does not go back, in Europe, beyond the year 1853.

30. The most suitable order to follow in the examination to which we shall devote ourselves is doubtless the historical order, which joins to the advantage of presenting the facts according to the times when they manifested themselves that of showing them in their simplest coordination to persons curious to know their causes. I do not pretend merely to present the critical history of these facts by reviewing the most remarkable writings to which we owe knowledge of them, and by opposing the opinions of their authors to one another; I wish also, after this double exposition, to show the intervention of a principle whose influence I believe I have demonstrated by my own experience. This principle concerns the development in us of a muscular action which is not the product of a will, but the result of a thought which bears on a phenomenon of the external world, without preoccupation with the muscular action indispensable to the manifestation of the phenomenon. This statement will be developed when I apply it to the explanation of facts observed by myself, and will become perfectly clear, I hope, when the reader sees that it is the precise expression of those same facts. In bringing a great number of observations and experiments back to this principle, far from me the pretension of comprehending in a single explanation the ensemble of those published on the subject occupying me; it will suffice for me to show, in a special part, that most of the propositions advanced in the form of experiments or observations in two published works — one in 1808, on the explorer pendulum, by Gerboin, professor at the School of Medicine of Strasbourg; the other in 1826, on the furcelle or rod, by the Count de Tristan — fall within my explanation, just as well as a certain number of facts described in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries concerning the movement of the divining rod.

31. If there is no illusion on my part, I shall show without hypothesis how facts qualified as supernatural fall within the domain of the positive sciences; I repeat that these are not all the facts indiscriminately given as such, but a certain number of those attributed to different causes according to the times or according to the systems of philosophy professed by the authors who wished to explain them. Thus, after having been generally attributed to spiritual beings, they could then be attributed to occult qualities or properties, such as sympathy and antipathy, by peripatetics; to excessively tenuous corpuscles by Cartesians; to imponderable fluids, such as magnetism, electromagnetism, organo-electricity, etc., by contemporary authors. It is therefore with the reservation made of not pretending to explain all the observations, all the experiments, all the propositions given as facts by the authors who have treated of the divining rod, the explorer pendulum, and turning tables, that we shall enter upon the matter.

32. I hope, in short, to show in a precise manner how clever people, under the influence of the love of the marvellous so natural to man, cross the limit of the known, of the finite; and how then, not feeling the need to submit to a reflective examination the new opinion that reaches them under the seal of the marvellous and the supernatural, they suddenly adopt what, studied coldly, would fall within the domain of facts to whose causes it is given to man to ascend. Is there stronger proof of man's love of the marvellous than the welcome given in our days to turning tables? I do not think so; more than one strong mind that accuses its fathers of credulity in rejecting their religious traditions admits as real what theologians contemporary with Louis XIV rejected as impossible or treated as chimera. This fact confirms what I said of credulity apropos of Eusèbe Salverte's Essay on Magic; for if the strong mind that rejects revelation does not rest on the scientific method proper to discerning error from truth, the uncertain from the demonstrated fact, it will be ceaselessly exposed to adopting as true the most bizarre, the most erroneous, or at least the most contestable opinions.

33. This work is divided into five parts. First part: the facts concerning the divining rod, considered from the historical point of view. Second part: the facts concerning the explorer pendulum, considered from the historical point of view. Third part: the facts concerning turning tables. Fourth part: the exposition of the cause to which the movements of the rod, of the explorer pendulum, and of turning tables are due; a cause I name the principle of the explorer pendulum. Fifth part: intervention of the principle of the explorer pendulum in a great number of acts of human life.



Part One: Facts Concerning the Divining Rod, Considered from the Historical Point of View



Introduction

57. How were men led to attach mysterious ideas to a staff, to a rod, to a wand? History teaches us, showing this staff, this rod, this wand, as an attribute of authority, of power, of a certain dignity; then as concurring in the manifestation of marvellous effects, when it does not present them to us as the very cause of those effects, conformably to man's disposition to confound the phenomenon with its cause…



Chapter I: Citations from the Bible Where the Staff, the Rod, or the Wand Is in Question

58. In the Bible the staff, the rod, the wand appear often in a manner to fix the reader's attention, whatever the aspect under which they are offered to him. Let us see some citations.

59. First citation. — After telling how Jacob agreed with Laban, his father-in-law, whose flocks he kept, that all the young born white or black should belong to the latter, while those born speckled should be Jacob's property, Genesis adds (chap. XXX, vv. 37, 38, 39, 41): "Jacob took green rods of poplar, of hazel, and of chestnut, and made white stripes in them by peeling and removing the bark that was on the rods. He placed the peeled rods in the troughs, in the watering-places where the ewes came to drink, before the ewes, which then came into heat as they came to drink. The ewes therefore came into heat near the rods, and their young were streaked, speckled, and spotted. It happened that every time the early ewes came into heat, Jacob placed the rods before the eyes of the flock in the watering-places so that they should conceive by the rods."

If this passage of Genesis testifies to the antiquity of the opinion attributing great influence to the gaze in conception, it is not in that sense that it is recalled here. I cite it because Father Ménestrier reproduced it in his Philosophy of Enigmatic Images apropos of the use of the divining rod. Speaking of Jacob, I cannot dispense with recalling an expression that recurs frequently in the language of the occult sciences and has even been taken as the title of a book: that of the Rod of Jacob, which in the end signifies a staff, a wand, endowed with marvellous properties. The following citations show at once the rod, the wand, as an instrument of miracles under the will of the Lord, and as a magical instrument under the influence of the Demon.

60. Second citation. — "The Eternal said to him: What have you in your hand? He answered: A staff. He said: Throw it on the ground; he threw it on the ground, and it became a serpent. Mosheh (Moses) fled before it. The Eternal said to Mosheh: Stretch out your hand and seize its tail; he stretched out his hand and seized it, and it became a staff again in his hand." (Exodus, ch. IV, vv. 2, 3, 4.)

61. Third citation. — "As for this staff, take it in your hand; it is with it that you will do the signs." (Exodus, ch. IV, v. 17.)

62. Fourth citation. — It is with the rod of God that Moses and Aaron work miracles before Pharaoh, and Exodus teaches us that the Egyptian magicians themselves made use of rods in their enchantments (Exodus, ch. VII, vv. 9–20; ch. VIII, vv. 5, 16; ch. X, v. 13; ch. XIV, v. 16).

63. Fifth citation. — The following citation establishes a remarkable coincidence between the wand and water. The people of Israel are in the desert. Beaten down by fatigue, devoured by heat, they ask for water, and Moses gives it to them by striking with his rod the rock of Horeb (Exodus, ch. XVII, vv. 5, 6).

64. Sixth citation. — Is it a question of choosing the high priest among the twelve tribes of Israel? The wand becomes the organ of God's will. Twelve rods, on each of which was written the name of one of the chiefs of the tribes of Israel, are shut up in the tabernacle, in order to know the chief God will choose as high priest. The next day, the rod bearing the name of Aaron of the tribe of Levi announced to all, by the flowers and fruits it had produced, that these functions devolved on the elder brother of Moses (Numbers, ch. XVII, vv. 17–25).

In the two following citations from the prophets Ezekiel and Hosea, the wand appears as a means of divination.

65. Seventh citation. — "For the king of Babylon stands at the parting of the way, at the head of the two roads, to have sorceries made for him. He shakes the arrows, interrogates the teraphim, examines the liver." (Ezekiel, ch. XXI, v. 26.) The arrows are iron-tipped wands furnished with feathers.

66. Eighth citation. — "My people consult a piece of wood; a staff must announce to it [the future]: led astray by the spirit of fornication, they have prostituted themselves far from their God." (Hosea, ch. IV, v. 12.)



Chapter II: Of the Rod or Staff in Profane Antiquity and the Middle Ages to the End of the Fourteenth Century

67. The Egyptian magicians of Moses' time used the wand, as one of the preceding citations shows. After that, and if it is true, as Herodotus advances, that the Egyptian Belus led an Egyptian colony to the banks of the Euphrates and instituted there the priests the Babylonians called Chaldeans, it is not surprising that they practised rhabdomancy, or the art of divining with the wand, as several authors claim, and particularly Father Pierre Lebrun (Critical History of the Superstitious Practices, pp. 86–87; Rouen and Paris, 1702). St. Jerome and St. Cyril think the Jews, after the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar II and during their captivity at Babylon, familiarised themselves with the use of the wand, and that is the reproach the prophet Hosea addresses to them in the eighth citation of the preceding chapter. Maimonides, a rabbi who lived in the twelfth century and wrote a Treatise on Idolatry, professes the same opinion. It is probable that the Chaldeans spread the use of the wand among many Asiatic peoples, particularly among the Arabs, their neighbours.

68. Herodotus says the Scythians practised rhabdomancy; the Brahmans of Persia, according to Strabo, the Brahmans of India, according to Philostratus, and the peoples of Mytilene practised it also.

69. In Greek mythology, Minerva, Mercury, etc., produce the most marvellous effects by means of the wand. It is by touching Ulysses with her wand that Minerva gives him the aspect of youth or that of an old man covered in rags (Odyssey, books XIII and XVI). Mercury holds the wand when he sends souls to the underworld or draws them from it (Odyssey, book XXIV; Aeneid, book IV), when he unleashes winds and tempests. For several authors, his caduceus is only the wand he used as a necromancer to evoke the souls of the dead. Janus, the divinity presiding over public roads, is represented, like Providence, with a wand in his hand. The wand in the hands of Circe and Medea, who are only simple magicians, likewise produces marvellous effects. Circe, touching with her wand the twenty-two companions of Ulysses, changes them into swine. She changes Picus into a woodpecker in the same manner (Ovid's Metamorphoses, book XIV; Aeneid, book VII). Medea, a magician, is also represented with a wand in her hand.

70. The divinatory art was in great esteem among the Romans, as the institution of the augurs and Cicero's book De Divinatione show. The augurs used the lituus, the augural staff, a recurved wand, of which Livy, Aulus Gellius, Macrobius, and Plutarch speak. Romulus was renowned for his augural science. We know from Tacitus that the Germans, like the Romans, set great store by it. "The ancient Germans," says that great historian (Germania, in Dureau de Lamalle's translation), "believe in auspices and divination more than any nation in the world. For divination, their method is simple. They cut into several pieces a wand from a fruit tree, and after distinguishing them by different marks, they throw them at random and pell-mell on a white cloth… And the priest takes each piece three times, and according to the marks presented, he gives the explanation."

71. The Alans used a divining wand of osier, according to Ammianus Marcellinus. The Frisians and several Asiatic peoples, such as the Chinese, the Hindus, and the Turks, used it also at a remote epoch; the latter used arrows after the fashion of the ancient Babylonians. It would be difficult to say precisely all the circumstances in which the wand was employed in antiquity and the Middle Ages to the end of the fourteenth century. However, it is probable that it served only to recognise things of the moral world. For example, Herodotus says the Scythians used it to recognise perjurers. The Frisians used it to discover thieves…



Chapter III: Of the Use of the Rod from the Fifteenth Century to 1689

72. Agricola treats with some detail, at the end of the second book of his Treatise De Re Metallica (Basel, 1546), the divining rod for discovering mines, but he has no faith in its indications. He does not conceive how it could turn on its axis by virtue of an action compared to that of magnetism on iron. Belon, of Le Mans, says in 1554 in his Voyage (book I, ch. L, p. 45): "The workmen of the mine of Siderocapsa, situated in Macedonia near Serbia, who dig the mine within the earth and draw it up, have not the use of the caduceus, in Latin virga divina, which the Germans use in spying out the veins." Philipp Melanchthon (1497–1560) is generally held to have attributed the use of the rod to the sympathy of the hazel for metals, in a discourse on Sympathy. His son-in-law, Kaspar Peucer, professes the same opinion in his Treatise De Praecipuis Divinationum Generibus (book XIII, ch. X). Porta speaks of the rod in the same sense, 1569 (Magia Naturalis, book XX, ch. VIII). Andreas Libavius, of Paracelsus' school (died 1616), believes in the rod's efficacy from his own experience; he does not condemn its use and attributes it to sympathy (Syntagma Arcanorum Chimicorum, p. 260). Keckermann (1573–1609) cites Melanchthon to support his opinion on the rod (Systema Physicum, book I, ch. VIII). In one of the seven discourses following those of Simon Maiolus, bishop of Volturara, the use of the rod is approved and made to depend on a physical property of bodies, a sympathy (Dies Caniculares, part II, colloquy IV, p. 690, ed. 1614). Michael Maier, author of many allegorical works on alchemy, in his book De Verum Inventum, hoc est Munera Germaniae (ch. IV, p. 84), speaking of gunpowder, which he says was discovered in Germany and originally made with hazel charcoal, speaks of the sympathy of the hazel with metals and of the application of this property to searching for metals by means of the rod. Father Laurentius Forer (Jesuit), author of the Viridarium Philosophicum (1624), condemns the use of the rod as a superstitious practice.

73. Let us now speak of the employment of the rod to discover not only metals but underground waters. It is very difficult to fix precisely the epoch when men began to seek springs with the rod; in any case it was long after it had been used for metals. Father Pierre Lebrun thinks a Baron de Beau-Soleil and the Dame de Bertereau, his wife, who came from Bohemia to France in 1630, first employed it in searching for underground waters. They had provided themselves with a great compass, a seven-angled compass, a mineral astrolabe, a mineral geometric [instrument], a metallic rake, etc., and above all with seven metallic and hydroic rods by which they claimed to discover and distinguish metals, minerals, and the diverse qualities of underground waters. 1630 is therefore the most remote date we have to cite for the application of the rod to the discovery of springs, at least in France. The Baron de Beau-Soleil was charged with the mission of discovering mines by means of the rod. Ten years after his arrival in France, the Dame de Bertereau dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu a little book become very rare today, entitled De la Restitution de Pluton, dedicated to His Most Eminent [Lordship]. It contains a Catalogue of several mines discovered in France by means of the divining rod. This catalogue was reprinted by the Abbé de Vallemont in his Physique Occulte, p. 493, ed. 1693. (It was reprinted in 1779 by Gobet, in the Anciens Minéralogistes du Royaume de France.) Vallemont says the Baron de Beau-Soleil spent 300,000 livres on his researches. Father Lebrun thinks it was from his stay in France that underground waters came to be sought with the rod; it was already employed there to discover metals. It is proper to note in passing an error escaped by two writers of real merit, Father Dechales and Father Ménestrier, when they said the rod had been employed from the highest antiquity in searching for springs.

74. Let us continue the review of the most remarkable writings where the rod is in question from 1630 to 1689. I shall cite their authors' opinions and, as far as possible, the dates of their publications. Father Caesius (Jesuit), author of a Mineralogy printed in 1636, is against the rod's efficacy; he admits Agricola's opinion, and yet, says Father Lebrun, he poses the question whether the use of the rod may be permitted to seek gold. Robert Fludd, in his Philosophia Moysaica — that bizarre work where one finds more than one remarkable observation — before speaking of the rod, points out the sympathy of the crayfish and the oyster with the moon, of the herb rue with the fig tree, and of the myrtle with the pomegranate. Then, as an example of the sympathy of mineral with plant, he cites the movement toward the earth of the forked hazel rod when a man holding it vertically comes to pass above a vein of gold or silver (Philosophia Moysaica, Gouda, 1638, fol. 117). The celebrated chemist Rudolf Glauber, in the second part of the Mineral Work (1652), believes, from his own experience, in the rod's efficacy for searching for metals; he attributes it to a physical property. Father Jean-François (Jesuit) published at Rennes in 1653 a book On the Science of Waters, where he speaks of the rod for discovering them, but condemns its use. Father Kircher (Jesuit), whose vast science is known to all, adopting Agricola's opinion in his De Arte Magnetica (1654), goes still further; for after showing by experiment that wooden rods supposedly sympathetic with certain metals, balanced on a pivot, remain at rest at the approach of those metals, he concludes that these sympathies are wholly chimerical. In his book De Mundo Subterraneo (1678), returning to the subject, he is still more explicit: if the movement of the rod does not come from play or trickery on the part of him who holds it, it is not natural. A vapour given off by a metal would be unfit to produce it, and those who maintained such an opinion would be ridiculous, he holds. Edo Neuhusius believes in the rod's efficacy; he attributes its cause to a sympathy, or to the stars, or to some other cause (Sacrorum Fatidicorum, 1658, book II, ch. XXI).

75. Father Kaspar Schott (Jesuit) considers the use of the rod superstitious or rather diabolical (Physica Curiosa, 1662, book XII, ch. IV); but information later given him by men he considered religious and upright made him say in an annotation to that passage that he would not care to assert that the demon always makes the rod turn. I reproduce the passage in a note because it mentions the pendulum later qualified as explorer: "We have discussed the beating of a ring suspended by a thread inside a cup and indicating the hours. We have conceded that both effects do indeed occur, and not by virtue of the little rod or the ring, but either by the fraud of the users, or by a hidden motion of an evil demon, or perhaps also by fancy setting the hand in motion. I would not dare assert universally that a demon always produces both effects, since it is certain to me that religious and most upright men have tried the experiment not once with infallible success; who indeed obstinately defend that it is natural, and that no fraud, nor any emphasis of fancy, intervenes. But they have not yet persuaded me." (Physica Curiosa, book XII, p. 1532.) In Father Schott's Thaumaturgus Physicus or Magia Universalis one reads a Letter of Father Conrad, Jesuit, addressed to the author, in which he declares himself in the most explicit manner against the rod. Sylvester Rattray, author of the Theatrum Sympatheticum (1662), believes in the sympathy of vegetables with minerals. He admits the hazel rod is fit to discover silver; the wild pine, lead; the olive and the palm, gold and silver (p. 114). The illustrious Robert Boyle, in 1666, posed the question, as a member of the Royal Society of London, whether the divining rod is really set in motion by the neighbourhood of metals. Matthias Willenius, in a book written in German and published in 1671 or 1672 under the title True Relation of the Rod of Mercury, justifies the use of the rod, and admits that the influence of the stars under which the holder was born contributes to making it turn over metals, by the effect of the harmony established between heaven and earth.



Chapter IV: Of the Use of the Rod from 1689 to 1702

70. [The correspondence of Father Lebrun with Father Malebranche, 1689–1693, and the opinions sought from the Abbé de Rancé of La Trappe and the Abbé Pirot.] Father Lebrun held that the movement of the rod, at least where moral things were concerned, was the work of Satan, and that religion imposed on parish priests the duty of preventing the use of the rod. The Abbé de Rancé's conclusion was conditional on the reality of the facts on which he was consulted.

71. The Abbé Pirot, chancellor of the church and University of Paris, shares the Abbé de Rancé's opinion: parish priests must forbid the use of the rod as an illicit thing.

72. § VII. Murder of a wine merchant and his wife at Lyon. The subject is now sufficiently prepared for me to set out what happened at Lyon on the occasion of the murder of a wine merchant and his wife, committed on 5 July 1692; I shall abridge the account the Abbé de Lagarde gave of this sad affair, keeping as far as possible his expressions (Physical Dissertation in the form of a letter to M. de Sève, Lyon, 1692, p. 78).

On 5 July 1692, about ten o'clock in the evening, a wine-seller and his wife were slaughtered at Lyon in a cellar, and in the shop that served them as a bedroom 130 écus, 8 louis d'or, and a silver belt were stolen. A neighbour of the victims who knew a rich peasant named Jacques Aymar, born 8 September at Saint-Véran in Dauphiné (barony of Saint-Marcellin), who had the reputation of discovering springs, metals, thieves, and murderers by means of the rod, had him come to Lyon and presented him to the king's prosecutor. The criminal lieutenant and the king's prosecutor sent J. Aymar to the place of the murder; there he was moved, his pulse rose, a shiver seized him, and the rod turned in the two places in the cellar where the corpses had been found. Setting out to seek the murderers' traces, he perceived they were three; he followed them on land and on the Rhône, recognising all the places where they had stopped and the objects they had touched. At last he believed he recognised them at the camp of Sablon; but fearing ill treatment from the soldiers, he took good care not to make the rod act. Back at Lyon, he was sent back to the camp with letters of recommendation; there he recognised they had left. He followed them to Beaucaire. The rod guided him to the prison, where he recognised a little hunchback as one of the murderers; he perceived that the other two had taken the Nîmes road. The little hunchback, brought back to Lyon accompanied by J. Aymar, was recognised, conformably to the rod's indications, in all the places on the road where he had stopped. After denying all participation in the crime, he ended by confessing he had assisted at it as servant to two Provençals, who had committed it as well as the theft. In declaring the sum stolen, he claimed to have received only six and a half écus. The little hunchback's indications were verified. A big bottle which he said had served the murderers as a pretext to have it filled at the cellar was found, as well as a bloodied billhook. It is doubtless useless to add that the rod turned strongly over both objects.

73. Scarcely did the public know of the little hunchback's capture by means of the rod than men gave themselves to the most opposite conjectures on Jacques Aymar. Some believed him a sorcerer; others attributed his power to the sign of the Virgin under which he was born. There were people who had recourse to occult qualities existing between the rod and the objects that made it turn. Finally, the Abbé de Lagarde emitted a hypothesis by which he explained in a somewhat sensible and somewhat mechanical manner the different marvels the villager worked; I keep the Abbé's expressions. One consequence of this hypothesis was that those who excel at seeking springs should have the same gift for finding thieves and homicides, and this consequence was verified, the Abbé de Lagarde assures us, by experiments he suggested.

74. I shall add to the Abbé's account that Jacques Aymar, assisted by several archers, was sent in search of the two other murderers, that he followed them as far as Toulon to an inn where they had dined the day before. He recognised they had embarked, that several times they had set foot on the coast, that they had slept under olive trees; he followed their traces to the last limits of the kingdom.

75. Finally the little hunchback was condemned on 30 August to be broken alive on the wheel on the Place des Terreaux at Lyon, and to pass before the house where the murder had been committed. Arrived, on the day of execution, before that house, the sentence was read; he asked pardon of those poor people whose death he had caused by suggesting the theft, and by keeping the cellar door while they were slaughtered.

76. The importance Fathers Lebrun and Malebranche, the Abbé de Rancé, and the Abbé Pirot had attached to the use of the rod in declaring it illicit, three years before the Lyon murder, explains how the part Jacques Aymar had taken in the trial of one of the murderers — concurring with the criminal lieutenant and the king's prosecutor in designating a guilty person — must have struck the gravest minds of that epoch, whatever opinion they otherwise formed of the rod. J. Aymar underwent numerous trials, not only at Lyon before the men placed at the highest rank in the administration of the province, but also at Paris, at Chantilly, even at M. le Prince's, and later in Dauphiné, his native country. The trials made at Lyon on 3 September 1692 at M. de Sève's, lieutenant-general in the sénéchaussée and presidial seat of Lyon, assisted by two abbés, M. de Puget, and Dr. Garnier, were published by the latter. We shall see that M. le Prince wished to make public the results of the trials Jacques Aymar had undergone by his order.

77. The best-known writings that appeared immediately after the Abbé de Lagarde's account are, following chronological order: 1° A Letter of Dr. Chauvin, addressed to the Marquise de Senozan, written from Lyon dated 22 September 1692. 2° A Letter of Dr. Pierre Garnier, finished printing 10 November 1692, addressed to M. de Sève, seigneur de Fléchères; Lyon, 1692, 108 pages, large octavo. 3° A Letter touching the rod, printed in the Mercure of January 1693. 4° A Letter touching the rod, printed in the Mercure of February 1693. 5° A Letter of M. de Comiers, who though blind was a great partisan of the rod; Mercure of March 1693. 6° Physique Occulte, ou Traité de la Baguette Divinatoire et de son utilité pour la découverte des sources d'eau, des minières, des trésors cachés, des voleurs et des meurtriers fugitifs, by M. L.-L. de Vallemont, priest and doctor of theology; Paris, 1693, duodecimo of 608 pages, finished printing 21 March 1693. 7° Letter of M∗∗∗ to Monsieur on the adventure of J. Aymar; Mercure of April 1693, published by order of M. le Prince. 8° Letter of M. Robert, king's prosecutor at the Châtelet, to Father de Chevigny; Mercure of April 1693, likewise published by order of M. le Prince. 9° Lettres qui découvrent l'illusion des philosophes sur la baguette et qui détruisent leurs systèmes, by Father Pierre Lebrun, who had first called Father Malebranche's attention to the rod; finished printing 23 April 1693. 10° Letter of M. Malbosquet. 11° Letter of M. de Comiers against Father Lebrun; Mercure of May 1693. 12° Reply of Father Lebrun. 13° Indications de la baguette pour découvrir les sources d'eau, les métaux cachés, les vols, les bornes déplacées, les assassinats, etc., by Father Claude-François Ménestrier, of the Society of Jesus, at the end of his Philosophy of Enigmatic Images, Lyon, 1694. 14° Posthumous Itinerary Letters of Tollius, published in 1700 at Amsterdam with notes by M. Hennin, the author's friend. 15° Critical History of the Superstitious Practices That Have Seduced Peoples and Embarrassed the Learned, by Father Pierre Lebrun; Rouen and Paris, 1702.

78. We shall see that Drs. Chauvin and Garnier agree with the Abbé de Lagarde in attributing the movement of the rod held by J. Aymar, or by anyone else endowed with the same power, to a purely physical cause, and that the Abbé de Vallemont adopts this manner of seeing; so that the opinion of two ecclesiastics, the Abbés de Lagarde and de Vallemont, and of two laymen, doctors of medicine, MM. Chauvin and Garnier, is absolutely contrary to that advanced three years earlier by Fathers Lebrun and Malebranche and the Abbés de La Trappe and Pirot: all four unhesitatingly attributed the movement of the rod, at least where moral things were concerned, to the intervention of Satan.

79. Father Lebrun's Lettres qui découvrent l'illusion des philosophes sur la baguette et qui détruisent leurs systèmes are remarkable for wit and excellent criticism. These qualities are found again in the Indications de la baguette divinatoire of Father Ménestrier. If Father Lebrun's Critical History of Superstitious Practices, the last of the writings just enumerated, is the most considerable of all…

91. [The trials of Jacques Aymar at Paris and Chantilly, ordered by the Prince de Condé and reported in two Letters published by his order — one by a person honoured with the Prince's confidence, the other by M. Robert, king's prosecutor at the Châtelet, to his uncle Father Chevigny, assistant to the Father General of the Oratory.] The first trial he underwent, in a room where there was much hidden money, was not satisfactory; J. Aymar claimed the gilding had troubled him. The second succeeded no better: four holes dug in a garden were each filled with a particular metal, a fifth with pebbles, and a sixth remained empty. The rod stayed motionless over the metals and turned only over the pebbles and the empty hole. J. Aymar failed at the Hôtel de Guise in searching for a thief: after several mysterious ceremonies, he told Madame the Duchess of Hanover that the author of the theft had passed through the great door. The rod turned everywhere a metal appeared to J. Aymar, but stayed at rest over a covered basket full of silverware, and under a silver branched candlestick he did not see. At this trial, says the Letter, princes, princesses, and many distinguished persons were present. Consulted on the theft of a plate committed to the detriment of M. de Gourville, he claimed the thief had passed through the fair; now the theft having been committed in October, the fair was closed at that time. At Chantilly, J. Aymar was no happier than at Paris. Trout, he was told, had been stolen from a basin; mystified by some insinuations of a M. de Vervillon, the rod turned over peasants wholly foreign to that theft, which had been committed seven years earlier. J. Aymar passed three times over a vault beneath which the river of Chantilly flowed, without the rod turning. To the question addressed to him whether there was water beneath him, he answered no. In the trials to which he was submitted, he never consented to have his eyes bandaged. M. Goyonnot, clerk of the council, by order of His Serene Highness, feigned to have been robbed and showed J. Aymar a broken pane of glass. The rod turned over the table, over the broken pane, without turning over the staircase; he descended into the courtyard where the glass debris lay, and the rod turned: he thus pursued an imaginary theft. M. Peyra, concierge of the Hôtel de Condé, recounted that J. Aymar, having gone to the house of a relative of M. de la Fontaine, marshal of the lodgings of the guards' regiment, where an armoire had really been forced and eight hundred livres stolen, believing it was still a feigned theft, did not make the rod turn; and on this occasion the Letter's author treats him as a cheat. A young man, on the point of marrying, consulted J. Aymar on his future wife's virtue and gave him two écus for the consultation. J. Aymar afterwards told the valet de chambre of M. Briol that the bride should pay him if she wanted a testimony of her good morals for her intended.

92. The search J. Aymar made for the author of a theft of four or five pieces of cloth from a M. Ferouillard, a merchant living in the Rue des Mauvaises-Paroles, was likewise without result. The merchant, before the operation, gave J. Aymar a coat, which the latter took care, says the Letter, to send to the Hôtel de Condé, where he lodged. J. Aymar, directed by his rod and accompanied by MM. Renier, Touston, Duchaisne, Mortier, went first to the Jesuits, to Picpus, then to Montreuil. That was the first day; the Letter mentions J. Aymar's refusal to find metals that would be buried in a square of sixteen feet. The next day he resumed the cloth-thief's track and followed it to Neuilly, whence he set out again for Paris. Poor M. Ferouillard was out a coat and fifty francs of expenses, besides the stolen cloth. The Letter adds that a theft was committed at M. le Prince's during J. Aymar's stay.

93. M. Robert's Letter is still more explicit on J. Aymar. Both went with M. le Prince to the Rue Saint-Denis, where a watchman archer had been killed by fifteen or sixteen sword thrusts. The rod did not turn over the very place of the murder, where J. Aymar passed two or three times. He excused himself by claiming the rod does not turn when the murderer was drunk or had let himself go in a movement of anger, and that it no longer turns once the murderer has confessed the crime. A theft had been committed in the Rue de la Harpe; the thief, taken in flagrante delicto and led to the Châtelet, persisted in saying he was innocent, and yet the rod stayed motionless in J. Aymar's hands, before M. Robert and M. le Prince. M. Robert's Letter ends with this sentence: "His Serene Highness is willing that the public be assured, to undeceive it, that J. Aymar's rod is only an illusion and a chimerical invention. Those are M. le Prince's words."

94. § XVI. Letters that discover the illusion of the philosophers and destroy their systems. Father Lebrun's book was finished printing on 23 April 1693, that is, thirty-three days after the Abbé de Vallemont's Physique Occulte, and yet, as I have remarked, it contains a perfectly reasoned critique of the corpuscle hypothesis advanced by the Abbé de Lagarde and sustained by Dr. Chauvin, Dr. Garnier, and the Abbé de Vallemont. Father Lebrun, in pointing out the drawbacks of explaining by corpuscles set in motion conformably to Descartes' ideas a host of phenomena previously attributed to occult properties, gives himself to considerations showing so much analogy between the disposition of the minds of that epoch and that of our own that I shall reproduce them textually:

"…Philosophers worth as much as Cardano will tell you there is a certain plant you have only to touch and press in your hands to purge such person as you wish without her knowing anything of it…. Was anything ever seen more marvellous! Touch the top of the leaves of one of these plants; behold at once an outflow of corpuscles in the form of magnetism which go to excite vomiting in the person you wish to purge: touch the root, and the purgation is from below. Do not laugh at it, Monsieur, and do not take it into your head to say that cannot be physical, or else resolve to be treated by Van Helmont as ridiculous, superstitious, ignorant. I would never finish if I set about reporting follies of this nature. Here is more than enough to conclude of what illusions people who pass for physicists are capable. Delighted at having mechanically explained some phenomena, they believe nothing can stop them; one sees them reason on the most obscure and wholly inexplicable things as if they saw clearly into them. Fables, prestiges, miracles, they account for everything, and manage it in such a way that their principles accommodate themselves to the false as to the true. So they are always ready to make systems. In vain one tells them with M. Boyle: Why do you hurry? Perhaps a new fact, some new experiments, circumstances you have not remarked, will overthrow at a single blow all your systems. Such advice is not listened to. Do they wish to make a name for themselves, as the same Boyle says? I know nothing of it; but I know well that the applause they receive from clever people is often of short duration. What do you say, Monsieur, of the philosopher who retailed in conversation a sort of system to mechanically explain the different marvels Jacques Aymar worked? He built, it is said, his hypothesis for the satisfaction of the king's men on their relation of the facts, and predicted to them, by consequences drawn from his principles, that those who excel at seeking springs must have the same gift as Jacques Aymar. By misfortune for the hypothesis, there are many people for whom the rod turns only over springs; and the philosopher was good enough to tell us himself that a woman skilled at seeking springs had made the rod turn at the cellar only very imperfectly; he could say plainly that the rod did not turn at all, without fearing contradiction, for the public has a marvellous fund of complaisance for all who speak in favour of what delights it. That is what those who undertake to explain such facts know very well, and that is also what makes them so bold; it is clear they count heavily on the docility of readers, on the disposition of peoples to receive everything that pleases them, and on the experience had in all times that the least reasons are persuasive when they authorise what curiosity, interest, or self-love makes us love. Probabilities, conjectures, the least appearance of truth, all is good to them. As they hope one will not look too closely, they do not fear to use principles in no way favourable to their opinions; and the very ones believed most fit to undeceive the world of a thousand follies are those they employ to authorise them…"

100. Father Lebrun also tells that, in a town where J. Aymar was, two or three giddy fellows made him pass through a street to know whether there were houses where the girls and women had ill kept their honour. The rod turned at five or six doors. "That spread through the town and caused so much backbiting, so much calumny, threw two or three families into such disorder, that the demon had great cause to rejoice. However," adds Father Lebrun, "the indications the rod had given were false. M. le curé of Eybens, near Grenoble, writes that a person from whom wheat had been stolen had recourse to the rod. It turned at the door of seven or eight houses. The man who had been robbed persuaded himself the wheat was there; he complained loudly of it and wished to make judicial searches. First, suspicions, backbitings, calumnies, quarrels, and the most atrocious insults set almost all the parishioners against one another: that is what the demon gained. However, M. le curé learned by a sure way that the rod had turned falsely, and that neither the thieves nor the stolen wheat had entered those houses." (Lettres du père Lebrun, pp. 237–238.)

101. Finally, Father Lebrun sums up thus the rod's part in the discovery of the Lyon murderers: "Three scoundrels commit a murder and a theft together; one of the three has much less part than the others in both the murder and the theft. His hands were not bloodied; he only kept the door of the cellar where the murder was done, and of five hundred francs stolen, only six écus came to him for his pains. Much less adroit than his companions, he lets himself be taken at Beaucaire for a petty larceny. He is put in prison, from which perhaps he would not have come out without being made to declare his crimes and being deprived of the means of easily committing new ones. Yet he is the only one of the three scoundrels the rod found. The others, it is said, are demons, public pests; the rod spares them, and the little hunchback pays for all." (Idem, p. 265.)

102. I shall close the summary of Father Lebrun's Lettres with his account of what happened to a Mlle Ollivet, in whose hands the rod turned over springs and metals. Mlle Ollivet, a person full of faith, having heard it said that Father Lebrun attributed the rod's movement to the demon, came to consult him on the scruples this opinion awakened in her. Father Lebrun advised her to ask God for the grace of leaving no doubt on this subject, "and to pray Him not to permit the rod ever to turn in her hands if the demon had part in that turning; that it might well be that our prayers would not be heard, but there was ground to hope the demon would not act when these precautions were taken; that moreover it would not be tempting God, and that the prayer she would make was contained in what we ask each day, to be delivered from the demon's wiles and insults." The advice is accepted. Mlle Ollivet spends two days in retreat, communicates, makes her prayer in receiving the sacred bread, and I (Father Lebrun) do the same at the altar. In the afternoon, several pieces of metal are placed in a garden alley; she goes there, takes the rod, passes several times over all those places: but the rod does not stir. The pieces of metal are uncovered and brought near the rod: it is motionless. Finally they advance toward a well where formerly the rod had been seen to turn and twist violently in the young lady's hands, and at present not the least sign of agitation is perceived. The occasion to take the rod presented itself shortly after; she could not dispense with holding a rod over some pieces of metal, in the presence of several persons who knew that formerly the rod turned perfectly in her hands; but it was still motionless (Lettres du père Lebrun, pp. 276–280).

103. I draw at this moment no consequence from this citation; I shall do so only later. It suffices to remark that these are real experiments. In a first period, the rod turned in Mlle Ollivet's hands. In a later period, when she had the thought that the rod might not turn, without having certainty of it, the rod did not turn. That is the summary of the citation; later I shall develop its consequence.

104. The last citation I shall make is preceded by this reflection of Father Lebrun: "You are going to see in the fact whose account I have promised you that this cause (which makes the rod turn) accommodates itself to men's desires and follows their intentions."

105. Some persons, wishing what had happened to Mlle Ollivet to happen to some of those who practically used the rod with success, cast their eyes on a Mlle Martin, a simple and very wise girl, says the author of the Lettres; her father was a Grenoble merchant. She had discovered metals in cellars; she had recognised the place where a bell lay hidden under water since the flood of the river that had carried away the suburban bridge. She told Father Lebrun that she found the place of springs, and that God had granted her a particular grace in that the rod turned for her over relics. "And who told you," replied Father Lebrun, "that relics could make the rod turn? — No one," she answered; "I only knew it turned over the bones of the dead and over many other things, and I saw clearly that relics must have more virtue than all that. I tried it and I succeeded." Father Lebrun adds that she succeeded in discovering several pieces of metal hidden in an alley of the seminary garden. Although this girl was simple, in Father Lebrun's phrase, the reverend had nevertheless perceived that Mlle Martin secretly put something in her hand to divine of what species the hidden metal was. I reproduce the following text literally, because later I shall make use of it. Father Lebrun said to her: "You wish then to make a mystery of your secret? But I could well divine it, and perhaps I know more about it than you think; I know persons who always carry little pieces of each species of metal; they also carry pieces of all the other things over which their rod turns, and here is the whole secret: if they make a metal different from the one hidden touch the rod, the rod no longer turns. If they make the same touch it, it turns still better. M. Peisson, prosecutor at the parliament, and some others do quite the contrary. If, for example, they make gold touch the rod and it no longer turns over the place where it turned before, that is for them an infallible sign that there is gold in that place. Such is their practice, and they have given reasons for it in a writing that has been circulating for some days." I interrupt the citation to remark that it is impossible to refer the rod's movement to any physical cause; for if one really can discover by this means the species of metal buried in the earth, it is assuredly not by employing procedures of which one is absolutely the contrary of the other. "Finally there are others," continues Father Lebrun, "who have no need to make anything touch the rod; it turns according to their intention… — O my father, who would have believed you knew so much!" cried the girl. "I must then tell you everything. I did not learn M. Peisson's secret; I do as the first ones. But I should indeed like intention to make the rod turn; that would be very short work: I must try it. Two gold louis are thrown on the ground in two different places: the rod turns several times over one and not over the other, according as she desired it."

106. Mlle Martin made the rod turn over the bones of a reliquary, and, to her great astonishment, it turned only by a sixth over a second reliquary presented to her, in which there were only some pieces of stuff that had served a Carmelite of Beaune, dead in the odour of great piety. From what she had just learned on the influence of intention, she made new trials on the reliquaries and on some pieces of metal; the rod turned or stayed motionless according as she desired it. Finally, M. the Abbé de Lescot and the father superior of the Oratory, Cavard, having preached to her, she renounced with a good heart the demon and the rod. She nevertheless held it once more over metals, and saw without emotion that it no longer turned for her. Mlle Martin's sister and her mother, afflicted that she could no longer use the rod, gave her back the desire to make use of it, and with the desire returned, it is said, the lost power.

107. Father Lebrun cites also Prior Barde, M. du Pernan, canon of Saint-Chef, and above all M. Expié, who, after praying God to make the rod's movement cease in their hands if that movement was not natural, saw it cease…

117. After recognising, with Father Ménestrier, that the ensemble of phenomena attributed to the divining rod cannot be referred to a physical cause, I shall reproduce an account he gives of experiments performed before him by a religious person, because this account, set against Father Lebrun's concerning Mlle Martin, will become a means of control, a true criterion of the proposition I have just recalled (§104): "I have seen," says Father Ménestrier, "a religious person who has this talent, and who then used it, believing it quite innocent and natural, seek water; and after she had found it, if one put in one of her hands a cloth or something else wet, the rod no longer turned. If she sought hidden gold, in vain one put water or silver in her hand, the rod did not cease turning for gold; but as soon as one put a piece of gold in her hand, its action ceased; which did not happen when she sought hidden silver, though she had gold in her hands." Thus, putting water in the hand that holds the rod set in motion by the presence of water is to destroy the latter's effect on the rod; in a word, there is neutralisation of an effect by the identical of the cause producing it. Here is an experimental fact attested by a trustworthy witness, Father Ménestrier. It is an example of M. Peisson's procedure.

118. Let us now recall that Mlle Martin discovered the nature of things by proceeding in an absolutely contrary manner, since the identical of the cause producing the rod's movement, put in contact with it, increased the movement, while what is different arrested it.

119. It evidently results from these facts, whose manifestation is equally proved, that they cannot be attributed to a physical cause, for in the same circumstances the same physical cause cannot produce two opposite effects. In the fourth part we shall see with what facility I shall explain them by one same cause; but that cause no longer belongs to the physical world, but to the moral world.

120. § XXI. Posthumous Itinerary Letters of Tollius, with notes by M. Hennin; 1700. Tollius and his friend Hennin are against the use of the rod. Hennin successively combats the explanation of the rod's movement given by the peripatetics and by the Cartesians. He goes so far as to say that to admit the possibility of tracking murderers by the effect on the rod of corpuscles exhaled from their bodies is to wish to reason in delirium; he positively denies the rod's virtue. I shall not set out his reasons, because they fall within those already set out; I shall confine myself to saying he saw rod-people who did not permit their eyes to be bandaged, or who made mistakes in making the experiments blindfolded.

121. § XXII. Critical History of the Superstitious Practices That Have Seduced Peoples and Embarrassed the Learned, etc., by a priest of the Oratory (Father Pierre Lebrun); Paris, 1702. The expression "superstitious practices" is not employed by the author with the sense given it in ordinary language; in using it, Father Pierre Lebrun means that these practices give rise to effects whose free and intelligent cause wills to seduce man: illicit in his eyes, he therefore proscribes them, as Cardinal Le Camus had already done at two epochs, in 1690 (mandement of 24 February 1690) and 1700 (mandement of 24 February 1700). The use of these practices, very frequent in Dauphiné since 1640 for discovering springs, was successively extended to the search for very varied things; for example, men, boys, and girls, for five sous, established, it was believed, by means of the rod, whether boundary marks of inheritances had been displaced; and their determination, a remarkable thing, was accepted by the interested parties as a tribunal's decision would have been. By the same means people claimed to find lost roads, and J. Aymar, the first in France, in 1688, searched for thieves and later for murderers.

122. Father Lebrun, seeing how uncertain the rod's indications are, preoccupied moreover with the disorders it could cause in families and in the decisions of justice, convinced besides that it is only an instrument the demon uses to deceive men, strove by every means to abolish its use forever; it is from that standpoint that the Critical History of the Superstitions must be judged, whose principal object concerns the divining rod. Not having to examine this book in its details, nor to discuss whether the rod's movement should be attributed to a spirit foreign to man, I shall extract from it what I believe fit to support the thesis I shall develop in the fourth part.

123. To give an idea of the work, it suffices to indicate the object of the three parts composing it. The first is consecrated to the history of the facts, the origin, and the progress of the rod. The second is consecrated to the cause that can make the rod turn, and to the rules necessary to discern natural effects from those that are not. The third part treats of the sufficiently common disposition that leads men not to condemn what does not appear outwardly harmful, and which engages several scholars to authorise superstitious practices that should be forbidden to Christians.

124. Father Lebrun reports a great number of cases where the rod failed. I shall choose some, to add to those M. le Prince wished the public to know, to disgust it with the rod.

125. M. de Francine Grand-Maison, provost of the Île-de-France and intendant of waters, told Father Lebrun that by virtue of the two charges with which he was invested he was very often engaged to make use of the rod to recognise criminals and discover springs, and that though he had employed a very great number of people reputed skilled at handling the rod, notably reverend Capuchin fathers, he never found anyone in whom one could have confidence, because the rod often gave the change and very often spoke falsely. Near the town of Salon in Provence one sees wells of a frightful depth, says Father Lebrun, dug uselessly on the deceptive indications the rod had given. Marshal de Boufflers, having no water in the neighbourhood of a château he had just had built in Picardy, had recourse to M. Legentil, prior of Dorenic near Guise, whose reputation was great in the country. He stayed three weeks with the marshal; the rod turned strongly in several places, and the witnesses said the prior trembled with fright at it. Yet digging was done in those places to sixty feet without finding water. Father Lebrun recounts that in September 1695 M. de Francine, M. the Abbé de Château-neuf, and M. the king's lieutenant of Charleroi brought him a young boy become famous at Paris by the manner in which he used the rod. These gentlemen went to the Château-d'Eau near the Observatory, where M. de La Hire and a mathematical physicist were present. The rod did not turn over the place where all the Arcueil waters pass. He was led into a garden where metals had been buried; the rod did not turn there either.

126. One could cite a great number of passages where, in the facts recounted by the author, the influence of the thought — whether will, desire, or simple intention — of him who holds the rod is wholly evident; but, forced to restrict myself, I shall choose the following, which go perfectly to my purpose, as repetition and confirmation of those I have extracted from the works previously examined.

127. In speaking of the means of determining the nature of a body acting screened on the rod, from the increase of movement or its cessation manifested in consequence of the contact of a known body with it (see above, §105), I said that some conclude the identity of the body touching the rod with the hidden body from the increase of the rod's movement, while others draw the same conclusion from the absolutely contrary effect. Now it is evident, as I remarked, that the effects cannot be attributed to any blind cause, but to a free cause, and I shall say later, to man's thought. Those who conclude identity of nature from the increase of the rod's movement admit the corpuscle theory, and say that the corpuscles exhaled, for example, from the gold in the ground and those exhaled from the rod and from the gold touching it conspire to increase the movement, while if the rod touched something other than gold, the corpuscles of that thing would prevent the outflow of the others. Those who conclude identity of nature from the cessation of the rod's movement believe in the sympathy manifested by an attraction, and say that the gold touching the rod, attracting the rod, makes the effect of the subterranean gold cease. Certainly all reflection would be superfluous after these citations.

128. Let us add two new facts to the analogy I have established between the divining rod and striking tables, when answers are addressed to them to which they reply. M. Duverdier, doctor of the Sorbonne, received a letter from Toulouse, dated 26 May 1700, in which he was told of a curé who handled the rod in such a manner that it answered questions put to it…



Chapter V: Of the Use of the Rod from 1702 to Our Own Day

[§ I. Dr. Thouvenel's Physical and Medicinal Memoir showing evident relations between the phenomena of the divining rod, of magnetism, and of electricity. Thouvenel attributes the rod's action to "electro-magnetism"; the corpuscles of the Abbé de Lagarde, of Drs. Chauvin and Garnier, and of the Abbé de Vallemont are replaced in his hypothesis by electric effluvia.]

135. Let us sum up the effects Bleton, searching for springs, presented to Dr. Thouvenel and to different persons who addressed to that scholar, at his request, an account of their observations. Bleton confessed that the rod was wholly useless to him, that it served only to show those observing him what was happening within him. He regarded it therefore only as a simple index. Hot, dry weather suited his researches better than cold, damp weather. A remark which, in my view, does not lack importance is that Thouvenel says he "perceived several times that the bringing together of the arms and a certain turn of the hand on the dowser's part contributed not a little to giving his rod the first impulse of rotation over weak springs (p. 114)"; I add in support of Thouvenel's observation the following passage from a Letter addressed to him by M. le comte de M…, dated from Chagny: "I was then very much persuaded; but I have grounds to suspect that this rod is a little helped by an almost insensible movement of the shoulder. In any case, I believe no less in Bleton's astonishing sensations, and I have advised him to abandon the rod, having no need of it to confirm a very real phenomenon" (p. 188). Bleton finds springs even with a bandage over his eyes and his forearms only free. The rod turns for him above all when he is over the vertical of the spring; yet there is often a slight deviation. It turns when he is mounted on a tree, on a ladder, on the shoulders of a man who feels no impression of the spring below him. Bleton is sensible to the impression of underground water when he has his head down and his feet up. But the rod placed on the soles of his feet does not turn, which agrees with the remark made above, of the turn of the hand or an almost insensible shoulder movement. When Bleton moves away from the spring, the rod ceases to turn; and when it has reached a determined and invariable distance, the rod sets in motion again, but this time it makes only one turn on its axis, and the movement is the inverse of the first, that is, from front to back. The distance from this point to that where the rod indicated the spring is, says Thouvenel, the measure of the depth at which the water lies.

Although Thouvenel cites many observations according to which Bleton guessed right, this success does not agree with a certificate signed F.-J. F∗∗∗, prior of the Chartreuse of Beaune. The prior certifies the following fact: Bleton indicates a spring at twelve feet deep. A hole six feet in diameter is dug to seven feet deep. There a little spring is found, eleven feet from the stake Bleton had planted. He returns and says that is not the indicated spring. Digging continues, and at about ten feet an abundant spring is found. That is the certified fact. Now the prior, author of the certificate, says: "He is much mistaken as to the depths; he has no other rule for designating them than that given him by Mgr de L∗∗∗, last Bishop of Grenoble, but it is not sure." F.-G. G∗∗∗, prior of the Chartreuse of Lyon, says Bleton was as learned at the age of seven as he is now; experience has taught him that he was fallible as regards the depth and the volume of water, and I believe that is all the progress he has made in his art. Moreover, Bleton himself confessed he was not sure of designating exactly the depth of a spring exceeding thirty feet. Bleton discovers minerals (metals) as well as waters, by the direction of the rod's rotation, because over the former the movement is the inverse of what it is over waters. The prosecutor of the Grande Chartreuse says the rod turns only on one side for other turners, and that they distinguish a spring from a mineral in that a piece of some mineral, put in their hands, arrests the movement if it was determined by water, whereas if it was determined by a mineral, it is increased. The movement caused by a body is therefore increased by the identical of that body.

136. Sigaud de Lafond, the physicist, believed in the rod; he cites a lady in whose hands it turned, and — a remarkable fact, he says — hidden gold and silver acted on her, provided they were not covered with tin, for then the movement ceased.

137. Thouvenel, preoccupied with the idea that the rod turned by virtue of an electric action the dowser transmitted to it, says that double silk gloves prevent the rod's movement without the dowser ceasing to receive the impression of the spring; he adds that silk stockings weaken the action but do not absolutely intercept it, doubtless because the insulation is not perfect.

138. Thouvenel does not say a word of the rod's influence to know the future or discover things within the province of the moral world. But in restricting the rod's domain to the discovery of springs and mines, does he report facts different from those of which I have spoken, and fit to add to the probability of the phenomena? That is what I do not think. Yet it seems that by restricting the rod's domain to the physical world, by showing man's body endowed with the dowser's faculty as necessarily experiencing, in defined circumstances, the neighbourhood of water and of metals — certain electric impressions revealed outside the body by determined phenomena, such as the movement of a rod whose role is reduced to that of a simple index — it seems, I say, that this would make the divining rod easier to accept as a real physical phenomenon by serious minds. In seeking to simplify the facts relating to the rod, by clothing them in a scientific form, one makes for precise minds still more striking the difference distinguishing them from facts belonging to the positive sciences. Thus electrified or magnetic bodies move toward one another and mutually repel; but not one, when free to move, turns on its axis as Bleton's rod does. No body, after moving in a certain place by a permanent physical cause there, and ceasing to move through a displacement that withdrew it from that cause, ever leaves the state of rest again, whatever the place outside the first where it is set. Nothing analogous is known to that single turn of revolution on its axis in the inverse sense of the turn the rod first made. Certainly such an effect shows too much intelligence to be referred to physics properly so called, for evidently the movement effected in the second place by the rod is, from the rigorous standpoint of science, an effect without a cause. This effect presents all the more difficulty to be considered real because it does not belong to Bleton, but a stranger suggested it to him; and on another side, while declaring the rod's movement a simple index, those who believe in its reality speak of a certain turn of the hand and of an almost insensible shoulder movement, which prove, in my view, the settled will to produce that movement.

