THE WAKEFIELD COLONY

by William J. Chapman, Ph.D. — reprinted from Volume X of the Kansas Historical Collections (State Printing Office, Topeka, 1908).

> Chapman's history of the English settlements that came out to Kansas in the 1870s. It is here first stated plainly, because the volume is so often mis-shelved: this book is principally the story of the English colony at Wakefield, in Clay County — and it is included in this county series because Chapman continually measures his little colony against its grander sister, George Grant's English settlement at Victoria, in Ellis County (the 50,000-acre purchase of 1873, named for the Queen), whose founding, settlers, church, and failure occupy a long thread of the narrative and its notes. First published serially in the Clay Center Times in 1907 and as a pamphlet the same year; revised and reprinted by the State of Kansas from the Historical Collections in 1908.


* * *

A Contribution to the Local History of Kansas.

By WILLIAM J. CHAPMAN, Ph. D.,

( Univ. Halle, 1904.) Member of the Kansas Sate Historical Society.

Reprinted from Volume 10 of the Kansas Historical Collections.

STATE PRINTING OFFICE, TOPEKA, 1908.

To the Old Settlers of

Wakefield and the surrounding country

this narrative

is dedicated in heartfelt appreciation

of the interest

they have taken in the author's efforts

to recover the

History of Pioneer Days.

w. J. c.

NOTE.

The material contained in the following narrative was, for the most part, collected during the autumn and winter of 1905. An article on the English settlement at Victoria, Ellis county, from the pen of Mr. R. T. Batchelor, which appeared in the Wakefield Advertiser January 21, 1898, first suggested the idea of a history of the beginnings of Wakefield. In the year 1899 the writer corresponded with several of the older residents of the town, but was not successful in getting them to record the story of pioneer days. In consequence the plan was laid aside for three or four years. The history in its present form does not claim to be exhaustive, although every care has been taken to render it accurate. (October 26,

This account of the Wakefield colony was first published serially in the Clay Center Times in 1907, and then reprinted as a pamphlet. (Clay Center, Kan., 1907.) So much new material has come to light during the year 1907 that I have found it desirable to revise the "History of Wakefield" throughout, and to incorporate the additional facts in the body of the narrative. _ W. J. C.

HosMEB Hall, Hartford, Conn., March 12, 1908.

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE LOCAL HISTORY OF KANSAS. By William J. Chapman, ^

Ph. D. ( University of Halle. 1904). and member of the Kansas State Historical Society.

The English settlement at Wakefield, Clay county, was one of four European colonies that came out. to Kansas nearly forty years ago. The following pages recount the story of its beginnings. Doubtless fuller information might be gleaned by one who had time to devote to the task. The writer has had access to the following sources of information:

1. Addresses delivered by Mr. J. B. Quimby, Doctor Burt, and Rev. Richard Wake, at the Old Settlers' Reunion, October 10, 1894. The two first named addresses appeared in the Wakefield Advertiser, October 25, 1894. Rev. Mr. Wake's address was published in the same paper November

2. The Wakefield Herald, vol. 1, No. 3, April, 1871. (By the courtesy of Mrs. Wm. Sparrowhawk.)

3. Miscellaneous printed matter, including a copy of the Star of Empire (now unfortunately lost).

4. Three maps belonging to Mr. J. P. Marshall, of the Wakefield Cooperative Association. The earliest of these is entitled "A Map of Junction City, Kansas, and Adjacent Country," page 46. It shows the area of settlement shortly before the coming of the English colony. The other two two was made in the year 1874, and has been invaluable in determining the location of the settlers and in furnishing clues in the search for oral information.

are maps of Wakefield and vicinity, pages 50 and 51. The earlier of the

5. The Plat-book maps. These are contained in a subscription work entitled "An Historical Platbook of Clay County," published by the Bird & Mickle Map Company, Chicago, 111., 1881.

Note 1.— William John Chapman was born at Stoke-sub-Hamden. near Montacute, Somerset. England, on November 15, 1869. Hi.s early childhood was spent at Wakefield. Kan. His parents returned to England in the autumn of 1874, where he received his education at boardingschool and by private tuition between the years 1875 and 1884. He came back to Kansas with his parents in 1884 and lived on the old homestead, in the vicinity of Wakefield, for eight years. After a course of preparatory study, he was licensed to preach in the Congregational denomination by a council which met at Wakefield on November 26, 1894. He was acting pastor at Wakefield from February, 1895, till September, 1896, and at the Congregational church. Nickerson, Reno county, 1898-'99. In 1897-'98 and in 1899-1901 he studied at Chicago Theological Seminary, and upon his graduation received the E. W. Blatchford fellowship for two years (1902-'03). On the expiration of the fellowship, he remained abroad for an additional year of post-graduate study under Prof. Alois Riehl. of Halle, and in December, 1904, received from the University the degree of Ph. D. cum lande. He has written on the following subjects: "The Geography of History" (Great Bend. 1894); "The Religion of the Dakota Indians" (Baccalaureate Dissertation. Chicago, 1901): " Die Teleologie Kants" (Halle. Germany, 1904). In 1906 he compiled the bibliography to the Gould Prize Essays, "Roman Catholic and Protestant Bibles Compared." (New York, Scribner's, 1908), edited by Prof. M. W. Jacobus, of Hartford Theological Seminary. More recently he has assisted Prof. E. C. Richardson, of Princeton University, in the production of "An Alphabetical Subject Index and Index Encyclopedia to Periodical Articles on Religion."

6 The Wakefield Colony.

For the use of much of the printed material my especial thanks are due to Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Lumb. of Wakefield.

Official Records.— It is a matter of great regret that none of the official records of the Wakefield Colony have been available. In a letter addressed to the writer and dated Salt Lake City, February 1, 1899, Rev. Richard Wake says: "The records of the company were retained by Mr. Maitland when he removed to Washington, and I presume were destroyed in the great Seattle fire which consumed his property a number of years ago."

Oral Information.— Iniormation has been gathered from all the old settlers with whom I have had the opportunity of conversing, but especially from the following persons: Messrs. William Guy, John Chapman, R. T. Batchelor, J. P. Marshall, H. S. Walter, T. C. Roscoe, E. R. Hawes, E. Eustace, T. Beldham, H. W. C. Budden, Mrs. Wm. Sparrowhawk and Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Lumb. For additional particulars I am indebted to Messrs. Wm. Seal and A. R. Goffin, and also to the Rev. R. O. Mackintosh, rector of St. George's church, for his kindness in securing information concerning the English settlers in Union township. In addition to the persons above named, I desire to thank Rev. Richard Wake, of Los Angeles, Cal., for several important corrections, and likewise to express my indebtedness to the secretary and department of archives of the Kansas State Historical Society, as well as the librarians of the State Library and the Library of the Connecticut State Historical Society.

I. -REPUBLICAN TOWNSHIP BEFORE THE COMING OF THE

ENGLISH.

THE earliest American settlers in this neighborhood came in the years 1856 and 1857. In April of the former year Moses, William and Jeremiah Younkins and John P. King, from Somerset county, Pennsylvania, settled on Timber creek, in what is now Grant township. The following year, 1857, was marked by the coming of the first New England settlers, when Messrs. J. B. Quimby and W. E. Payne settled in the southeast part of Republican township. Persons belonging to the Pennsylvania colony say that the population of Somerset county was of mixed origin, containing both Scotch-Irish and Pennsylvania Dutch elements. ^ They beHeve the date of settlement to go back to the close of the colonial period. The New England settlers were colonial Americans of English descent. In the autumn of 1857 came another group of settlers.. Lorenzo Gates, John Gill, and William Mall located higher up the river, where the names of Gatesville and Mall Creek commemorate them. The Mall family were natives of Baden, in South Germany.^ In 1858 the New England colony was reenforced by the coming of Rev. Wm. Todd, formerly a missionary at Madura in southern India. The first actual settler on the site of Wakefield was James Gilbert, who came in 1858.

Note 3.— S. S. Gaston, J. Faidley. Somerset county, Pennsylvania, "is composed of a high and rather level table-land between the great Alleghany mountains and Laurel hill. It abounds in what are called glades — level wet lands about the head waters of the numerous streams that rise in the county. The climate of this elevated region is too cold and the summers too short for raising corn, and the land is generally too wet for wheat. Oats, rye, hay and potatoes are the principal crops. The glades, when properly managed, form productive dairy farms. The wellknown glades butter bears the palm in Baltimore and Washington."— ( Hist. Coll. of the State of Pennsylvania, Phila., 1843, pp, 615, 616.)

Note 4. -Platbook, pp. 23, 89; Cutler's History of Kansas, 1883, p. 1312.

The Wakefield Colony. 7

' ' In the summer of 1858 James Gilbert and family took up their residence there (i. e., the 'eighty' south of Wakefield), he filing on it. He made rapid progress in improvements, and in many respects was a model pioneer. They remained about two years, and during that time built a larger and better house a few rods northvof the present site of Wakefield, which was occupied by them in 1859, making them the first settlers actually living in what is now Wakefield In the spring of 1860 he very suddenly left the country and his family soon followed."'^

The earliest settlements were determined exclusively by natural conditions. Of these the most important were the presence of wood and water, and the possibility of defense against Indians or outlaws. None of these conditions were to be found upon the high prairie. Along the banks of the river there were very few trees and only at the opening of the creek valleys was there a fairly dense growth of timber. For this reason the high prairies and the open river valley long remained unoccupied, but wherever a large creek flowed into the river there one would find the cabin of a settler or, if conditions favored it, the homes of a group of settlers. To this fact we owe many of our older place names. Thus Quimby creek, Mall creek, and Caine's creek preserve the names of their pioneer settlers. Milford grew up in the Bachelor creek neighborhood, and if the little stream which bounds Wakefield on the south had been sufficiently important as a landmark it would doubtless have been called Gilbert's creek.

The settlers, few as they were, were much depleted by the troublous times of the civil war.

"In 1860 there were eleven families in the Quimby neighborhood. In 1863 J. B. Quimby and Ed Kirby were the only men left there. John Butler, Lorenzo Gates and Jacob Mall were the only ones left on Mall creek."**

In a very real sense Kansas formed a part of the seat of war, being on the one side exposed to the attacks of guerrillas from Missouri, and on the other to the depredations of the plains Indians." In every community all 1 he men who could be spared bore arms. Fort Riley was the military headquarters. Henry Avery, of this city, recollects having been on picket duty near the ruins of the old Pawnee state-house when the news of the burning of Lawrence, August 21, 1863, came to the frontier settlements. The Indians continued to be a source of danger for several years after the close of the civil war. The battle of Arickaree,^ sometimes called the battle of Beecher's Island, was fought September 17 to 19, 1868, just a year before the coming of the English settlers. At a later time one of the Wakefield colonists fell in Custer's last battle on the Little Big Horn.

Note 5. — Wakefield Advertiser, October 25. 1894. address by J. B. Quimby. October 10. 1894.

Note 6. -Plat-book, p. 15.

Note 7. — "The next object of interest called to our attention." says Mr. R. T. Batchelor. in his account of Victoria. Ellis county, "was Union Pacific cemetery, just west of town and on the right of way. containingabout twelve graves. The plot of ground is neatly and substantially fenced, and kept in excellent rapair by the railway company. There are seven graves in a row, with a rough undressed stone at the head and foot of each. On one is carved the words 'In Memory ' and the commencement of another letter; the others are unmarked, excepting the foot of the south grave, which is roughly inscribed as follows: ' In Memory of Hry McDonney of Cambridge. Mass.. and five others, to me unknown for their memory. Ive carved this stone. Killed by Indians in the year 1864. Dock Williams, carver.' "—( Wakefield >4duerWse?-, January 21, 1898.)

Note 8— The Battle of Arickaree. by Winfield Freeman. Kan. Hist. Coll.. vol. 6, pp. 346-357; Hugh O'Neill, in the Kansas City Star. November 29. 1905.

)i:ur^ cM^^iz^ ^ ^T^t^M^r, 4^^/^-i--^ '^^r":iSJ^!^

8 The Wakefield Colony.

Doctor Burt, who came to Kansas in the spring of 1868, has thus described the area of settlement:

"In coming from Bachelor,* now Milford. the first house after leaving Mr. Hopkins's, this side of the river, was Mr. Quimby's log cabin, then Mr. Todd's stone house, then an old-fashioned log cabin where Mr. Payne's house now stands, then a log house in what is now Wakefield.... The next house to the north was, I think, Harvey Ramsey's, and the next ones were in the Avery district, which seemed well on toward Clay Center.... There was a cabin at the river where Mr. Manuel now lives, then occupied by Mr. North, of pleasant memories (we used to hunt wild turkeys from there). To the west Mr. Kirby's, also of logs, was, I think, the only house between us and Chapman creek— we had to go half way to Junction City before finding a house. The first public improvement I heard of after I came was to finish schoolhouse No. 8, so it could be used as a meeting-house. ' '^

The following gives an > estimate of the unoccupied area:

"In January, 1870, there were no houses between Clay Center and Fancy creek, between Clay Center and Chapman creek, nor between the head of Chapman creek and Wakefield. " '"

The accuracy of this statement has been called in question, but perhaps it may be interpreted to mean that before the coming of the English settlers in 1869-'70 the high prairies of Clay county remained for the most part unoccupied.

II. -THE ORIGIN OF THE KANSAS LAND AND EMIGRATION

COMPANY.

The Rev. Richard Wake,'' to whom the first impulse toward the formation of an English colony m this neighborhood was due, came to the United States in 1854, settling at first near New York. In 1860 he removed to Illinois. Soon after the close of the civil war he began to advocate through the English press the advantages of colonization on the western prairies. Two parties of Englishmen were in this way settled in the vicinity of Lincoln, Neb. Mr. Wake subsequently returned to Illinois, and, as he tells us, did not anticipate further experience in colonization. '^ At least three separate factors may be traced in the formation of the "company" that colonized Wakefield. Mr. R. H. Drew was a land-agent in London, and Mr. Wake was also widely known in Great Britain through his advocacy of the prairie states as a field forimmigration. At the same time Mr. John Wormald, of

* The act incorporatingthe town of " Bachelder " is contained in the Private Laws of Kansas Territory, for 1858, p. 303; Bradley E. FuUington, Samuel D. Houston. Moses Younken, Abraham Barry and Martin F. Conway, incorporators.

Note 9.- Wakefield Advertiser. October 29. 1894.

Note 10. -Plat-book, pp. 15. 16.

Note 11. — Wakefield Advertiser. November 8, 1894.

Note 12. — Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894: We quote from Rev. Richard Wake (Los Angeles, Cat, December 18, 1907): "Leaving England at a time of great business depression, I was requested by a number of friends to report on conditions here, with a view to encouraging emigration from England. Settling near New York, I found things not sufficiently in advance of England to advise removal to the states. In 1860 I removed to Illinois, and on its wide and fertile prairies saw opportunities full of promise to the industrious working man— and especially to the small farmer of England. But while I was collecting facts the civil war broke out. By the time the war closed the price of Illinois land had taken it out of reach of the class I had in view. I then visited Iowa and eastern Nebraska, reporting the result of my investigation to the Chrisitian World, of London, and also writing a pamphlet on the subject. In 1866 1 visited England and brought out a small colony to settle on government land in Otoe county, Nebraska. I had no intention of proceeding further in emigration movements, but later R. H. Drew, of London, who liud been directing migration to Australia, wrote, urging me to aid him and others in promoting <• riigration to the West. Though unwilling to further turn aside from my work in the ministry, J yielded, and the Wakefield settlement resulted."

The Wakefield Colony. 9

Wakefield, Yorkshire, was anticipating the formation of an English settlement in northern Missouri, i-' By what chain of circumstances these gentlemen were led to merge their respective purposes in a single plan the writer confesses himself uninformed. Those of their number who were in England seem to have realized the advisability of enlisting the services of Mr. Wake, and, with this in view, to have opened correspondence with him.'^ The correspondence at first took the form of a request for information concerning government lands in Kansas and Nebraska. '^ How the first inquiries developed into a colonial enterprise may best be told in Mr. Wake's own words:

"Later a scheme was proposed for the purchase of a large tract of land for cooperative farming, and, asking my advice on the merits of the scheme generally, I discouraged the co'')perative feature of the plan, but was in favor of associative immigration on a plan which would give to each settler individu'^l ownership of land and absolute control of the products of his own labor, and proposed the plan, adopted later, of the purchase of a large tract of land by a few, who should sell it again in quantities to suit, at a slight advance over cost, to first settlers, depending upon later, sales for profit on the investment. Late in June, 1869, I received a cablegram saying, 'Select 100,000 acres in Kansas for colony,' and on the 8th of July I arrived in Topeka on that errand. I inspected a certain reservation which had come into the hands of the Santa Fe company, but the price was too high. I came west to Junction City with a letter of introduction to Capt. A. C. Pierce. July 12 we took a team to view the land lying between the RepubHcan river and Chapman creek, taking the divide west of Junction City and following it to the head of Chapman creek. We saw but one house between the two points. The year 1869 was a fruitful one. Grass in the ravines would meet above the backs of the horses, and on the high land was knee high or more. Reaching on our return the present site of Wakefield, I thought, as I looked down the valley, I had never seen a more beautiful landscape.

"Securing the withdrawal of the land from the market, I reported to London, and in August Messrs. Wormald, Maitland, Batchelor and others arrived, Messrs. Wormald and Maitland being empowered to purchase the land if it met their approval. "^^,_

The purchase of the land was ratified by Messrs. Wormald and Maitland and steps were immediately taken to organize the colony. The land that was purchased is thus described by Mr. Quimby. ^^ "Their tract of land consisted of the odd sections in the vicinity of Wakefield and held by the Union Pacific railroad, from whom they purchased it." On the same subject, Mr. Wake says: "Contracts were made with the Kansas Railroad Company and the National Land Company for 32,000 acres at a cost of $102,000, one-fifth being paid down at the time of purchase." '*

The following list of the pioneers of Wakefield was furnished by Mr. R. T. Batchelor:

"The pioneer party, consisting of Messrs. Wormald, Maitland and others, sailed from England on the steamship Main ( North German Lloyd ) on August 3, 1869, and arrived in New York the 13th, reaching Junction City about the 21st of the month. The party included Mr. John Wormald, of

Note 13. -J. P. Marshall.

Note 14. — Wakefield Advertiser. November 8. 1894. Note 15.— Wakefield Advertiser, November 8. 1894. Note 16.— Wakefield Advertiser. Novembers. 1894. Note 17.— Wakefield Advertiser. October 25, 1894. Note 18.— Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894.

10 The Wakefield Colony.

Wakefield, "iorkshire; Mr. Alexander Maitland. of London, afterwards secretary of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company and one of the directors of the colony; Mr. Spence, the agricultural director of the proposed cooperative colony; Mr. R. T. Batchelor, Mrs. R. T. Batchelor and two children, of Fareham, Hampshire; Mr. Martin; Mr. Stone, who afterwards removed to Topeka; Mr. James Gibbons, the first proprietor of the "eighty " adjoining Wakefield on the southwest, known as the Allaway farm "

Another member of the party was Mr. James Marshall, of New Airesford, Hampshirei He was the first business man in the town, having put up a carpenter's shop on the lots afterwards owned by Mr. Thomas, corner of E street and Second avenue. He likewise made the first filing on the land subsequently owned by my father, and, in partnership with James Woodward, erected many of the earliest buildings in Wakefield and vicinity. ^^

August 25, 1869, the founders of the colony were incorporated as the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, and on the following day the town site was formally laid out. A cairn of stones was raised on the slope of Cedar Bluff and in it was deposited a parchment certifying the founding of the town and naming the parties therein concerned. 2" The cairn stood near the present site of Doctor Hewitt's residence. ^i The plat-book makes the following statement about the beginnings of Wakefield:

"The town was laid out by the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, consisting of Richard Wake, John Wormald, Alexander Maitland, Colonel Loomis, C. Wake, R. H. Drew and J. D. Bennett. The four first named of these selected the town site of Wakefield August 26, 1869. Colonel Loomis named the town Wakefield, partly in honor of the president of the company and partly because Wakefield, England, was the former home of John Wormald, the secretary of the company. "22

Colonel Loomis, who named the town, was president of the National Land Company, and, like Rev. Richard Wake, a citizen of Hlinois. His connection with Wakefield was due to the fact that the English colony. acquired a part of their land from the National Land Company. ^3 On October 6 the first large party of colonists arrived, and on the 12th of the same month the stockholders of the company met for permanent organization in the Hale House (now the Bartell) at Junction City.^^ The new corporation henceforth appears as "The Kansas Land and Emigration Company, incorporated August 25, 1869. ' '

In the former edition of thig narrative it was said that Mr. Wormald invested a fortune of $72,000 in the Wakefield colony. The statement certainly calls for revision. As a matter of fact popular tradition does credit Mr. Wormald with a fortune of $72,000, but in any case that was many times the amount of his actual investment in the stock of the company. Since the original narrative was composed the following more definite information has been obtained:

' ' Mr. Wormald certainly did not invest more than about $10,000 in the stock of the company, and I think it was only about $8000. He owned one-third of the stock, and, as we paid the railroad company but a little over $20,000

Note 19.— J. P. Marshall; in addition to the above, H. S. Walter names Messrs. George Gates, Miller and a young man named Meek.

Note 20. -Wakefield Herald, vol. 1. No. 3. April, 1871.

Note 21.— W. Guy. Note 22.— Plat-book, p. 25.

Note 23.— Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894.

Note 24. — Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894.

The Wakefield Colony. 11

upon our contracts with them, there was never more than about $24,000 in the treasury from subscriptions to stock. The balance of the stock was subscribed "by other members of the company, Colonel Loomis bemg the next heaviest holder. "■^''

We pass now from the formation of the company to the story of the settlers whom its inducements brought out to the prairies of Kansas,

III. -THE ENGLISH SETTLERS.

The Kansas Land and Emigration Company aimed from the start to stimulate the immigration of English settlers. Popular tradition charges the advertising material employed with being highly colored and not wanting in deliberate mistatement. In his address October 10, 1894, ■•^« Mr. Quimby puts the matter more dispassionately:

"To colonize their lands, their prospectuses and advertisements were circulated wholly in England, and the colonists were mostly English trades people from the cities, a poor class to settle up a new country."

Yet in all fairness to the newcomers it must be said that the hardships of pioneer life were such as neither townsmen nor landsmen were prepared to meet. In many instances it was precisely the experienced English farmer who proved least adapted to the new conditions. He had as much to learn and more to unlearn than the townspeople.

Some of the earliest English settlers came out independently of the company's plans. Foremost among these were Messrs. P. Gillies and H. S. Walter. Mr. Walter has kindly furnished the following account of his coming to Kansas:

"I met Mr. Gillies, who had been in Junction City about two weeks, the day I arrived in Junction City, August 11, 1869, and the next day took up land in Republican township, on section 28, adjoining Doctor Burt."

Mr. Walter also gives some additional particulars concerning the pioneers of the Kansas Land and Emigration Compatiy. He says:

"The pioneer party who came August 21 consisted of R. Wake, J. Wormald Spence, Miller, Maitland, Geo. Gates, and a young man named Meek, all of London, England, and also Mr. Loomis, land agent, of New York.

Messrs. Savage and Wooley were also in the neighborhood before the coming of the Wakefield colonists. 2' They lived in the same district and owned claims not far from that of Mr. Walter.

The first large party of settlers came over on the steamship Nebraska, of the Guion line, sailing from Liverpool on September 15, 1869, and reaching New York on the 29th. ^^ The voyage is remembered as an exceptionally stormy one. 2* The party came west by way of the Great Lakes, visiting Niagara Falls en route, and arrived in Junction City on October 6 The number of persons, old and young, comprised in the Nebraska party, amounted to seventy-seven. 3« The following list of its members was furnished me by Messrs. John Chapman and Wm. Guy, viz.: Mr. James Bil lingham, Warwickshire; Mr. and Mrs. Jas. Boyce; Mr. John Farrington

Note 25.— R. Wake. Los Angeles, January 29, 1907.

Note 26.— Wakefield Advertiser, October 25. 1894.

Note 27.- J. P. Marshall. Note 29.— J. Chapman.

Note 28.- W. Guy. Note 30.- W. Guy.

12 The Wakefield Colony.

Alsop (eldest son of Mr, Wm. Alsop, one of the leaders of a subsequent

party); Mr. Joseph Binns; Mr. Samuel Binns; Mrs., a married sister

of the two foregoing; (Mr Guy adds: "I cannot obtain the name of the sister of Messrs. Joseph and Samuel Binns. The latter had no family. The sister had two girls; the eldest died on the voyage and was buried at sea, it being the only death that occurred in our party of seventy-seven "^' ) Mr. and Mrs. Ison,^- Wolverhampton: all of whom came from the west Midlands. Mr. John Muston, Lincolnshire; Mr. Christopher Deere, and Mr. John Deere, Buckinghamshire;" Mr. H. H. Meade, West Wickham, Buckinghamshire; the foregoing were from the east Midlands. Mr. Wm. Guy, Sussex ( a native of the parish of Ripe, 1833, seven miles from Lewes; proprietor of one of our leading business houses, and my principal informant concerning the early history of Wakefield); Mr. Abner Shrives, Sussex; Mr. John Chapman, Somerset; (My father was a native of Montacute, in Somerset, where my grandfather, John Chapman, sr., and great-grandfather, Zachariah Chapman, were quarry owners and stone merchants, the quarry (Ham Hill) being leased of the Duchy of Cornwall.*) Mr. Geo. Taylor, Somerset; Mr. T. P. Pettigrew, Hampshire (afterwards secretary of the Wakefield Agricultural and Literary Society. He likewise officiated as lay reader in the early days of St. John's parish.); Mr. John Spooner and family, London. The foregoing all came from the south or southwest of England.

Other members of the party were: Mr. Edward Moore, from Northumberland, afterwards co-pastor of the Madura Union church; Mr. Robert

Poppleton and family, Yorkshire; Mr. Johnson; Mr. Gwyn;

Mr. John Cole; Mr. and Mrs. Butcher; Mr. and Mrs. James Woodward. Mr. Woodward was one of the first business men in Wakefield, and, in partnership with James Marshall, erected many of the earliest buildings. The party arrived in Junction City on Wednesday, October 6, and celebrated their arrival by holding a religious and social gathering at the Methodist church, corner of Eighth and Jackson, on which occasion the Rev. Joseph Binns was one of the principal speakers. ^^

During the winter settlers came singly or by families. Mr. John Pett, from Cambridgeshire, came out as agent for Mr. Docking. He reached Junction City December 6, 1869, and in the following spring moved out on a farm southwest of Wakefield. ^^ Information concerning others who came during the winter is not now obtainable.

Not many weeks passed before the English began to feel the hardships of pioneer life. My father, who was staying with Rev. William Todd, at Madura, had a severe attack of inflammatory rheumatism. No one thought he would recover. The Todd house, though more commodious than many other dwellings, was built in frontier style, the wall of roughly dressed stone, the woodwork of walnut or cottonwood. Here my father lay in an unplastered upper room, whose only ceiling was a roof of badly warped

* "Without any new creation, and previous to his acquiring the title of Prince of Wales, the heir-apparent of the sovereign is Duke of Cornwall, the most ancient title of its degree in England."—(Larned's History for Ready Reference, vol. V, p. 3644; Dodd, Manual of Dignities, pt. 2.)

Note 31.- Letter. Wakefield, Kan., April 3. 1907.

Note 32.- J. G. Billingham.

Note 33. — Historically considered, Buckinghamshire must be classed with Oxford and the Thames valley as a West Saxon district. — W. J. C.

Note 34.— W. Guy. Note 35.- J. Pett.

The Wakefield Colony. 13

native-lumber shingles. At night he could see the blink of the stars, and in stormy weather the snow drifted in on his bed. To add to his danger, his landlady, Mrs. Todd, was at this time afflicted with a felon. Under these circumstances it became necessary to move him to another house. He was carried at the dead of winter from the Todd house to the home of Mr. William Streeter. Here my father was fortunate in securing a downstairs room, and he remained with the Streeter family until after his recovery.

The dry continental climate, with its fitful and violent changes of temperature, proved very trying to the Enghsh settlers. Those who were here during the first winter recall a memorable storm that occured on the 16th of January, 1870.^" It was a Sunday morning, the weather delightfully mild, when a party of nine started for the Madura schoolhouse to attend the preaching services. Messrs. Billingham and Guy, a runaway midshipman named Broome, from Bath, England, and a Mr. Laundy ( the first proprietor of the Moutelle farm, in Union township ) and his son Willie were in the party. While the meeting was in progress the wind veered to the north and blew at the rate of sixty knots ^' an hour. The temperature fell very rapidly. Mr. Todd told his listeners that he had never seen but one storm equally severe, and that no one could drive a team in the face of such a hurricane. But those who had come from Wakefield resolved to make a dash for the old log house built by James Gilbert in 1859. The distance to be covered was a little more than two miles. Young Broome was the first to reach the house, but he was so benumbed with cold that he could not open the door. He had to wait in the tempest till others came to his assistance.

The continual privation of pioneer life was harder to bear than its occasional sufferings. In winter a large part of one's time must be consumed in getting wood and water. To settlers on the high prairie this often meant a journey of several miles. Besides all this there was a serious economic drawback. The country had scarcely recovered from the effects of the civil war, and for many commodities one must still pay "war time" prices. This had much to do with the apparent failure of the colony during its earlier days.

The spring of 1870 was marked by the coming of a second party of colonists. They were for the most part from Montgomeryshire, in Wales, or from the adjoining English county of Shropshire. The leader of the party was Mr. Wm. Alsop, who invested very considerable capital in the settlement of Wakefield. The Alsop party sailed from Liverpool in the steamship Colorado (Guion line) on Wednesday, the 6th of April, 1870.38 They set out from New York on Tuesday, the 19th, and reached Kansas City on the following Saturday. 39 On Monday, the 25th, they were met at Junction City by Rev. Richard Wake.

The following persons were members of the party:^" Mr. Wm. Alsop and family, county Montgomery, known at Wakefield as Mr. William Alsop of Caine's creek; Mr. Richard Alsop and family, county Montgomery; Mr. Edward Jones and family, county Montgomery; Mr. T. C. Roscoe, of Uniontown (sec. 22), (my principal informant of the history of the Alsop party); Mr. S. E. Richards (proprietor of the Wakefield Cash Store); Mr. Wm. Rich-

NOTE 36.— W. Guy. Note 37.— A knot is a nautical mile of 6087 feet.

Note 38.- T. C. Roscoe. Note 39.— T. C. Roscoe. Note 40. - T. C. Roscoe.

i4 The Wakefield Colony.

ards (brother of the preceding); Mr. Thos. Newell; Mr. Thos. Woods; Mr. Swinbourne, Cumberland; Mr. Wm. Dalton, Warwickshire; Mr. Farmer (subsequently a merchant in White City); Mr. Richard Bird, Mr. Bird (brother of the preceding); J. W. Sampson (afterwards removed to the western part of the state, probably Osborne county); Mr. I. W. Thomas, Cornwall. Mr. A. R. Goffin, from London, also came out on the Colorado, although he was not a member of the Alsop party. In the earher edition of this narrative mention was made of a Mr. Seimew (or Siemee), said to have come out about the same time as the Alsop party. Concerning this settler Mr. J. P. Marshall supplies the following information in a letter dated February 18, 1907:

"The man you write of as Siemee was here before the date you give, and boarded with the Todds for several months. His father was a bandmaster in a cavalry regiment in England and he was a player in the same. His claim was northwest of Wakefield. The Hanniba! schoolhouse No. 29 was built on his place and was the first voting precinct for this part of the county."

In the same connection my informant says: "Mr. Moutelle and family, from London, were here in March, 1870; also the Cowderys, from Southampton; both families building and living in Wakefield."

A smaller party, consisting of Mr. Jas. Eustace, Mr. and Mrs. Jardine, Miss Kynaston (an aunt of the Reed brothers), Mr. Alfred Taylor (brother of Geo. Taylor, who came out on the Nebraska), Mrs. John Chapman, her two children. Miss Jennie Taylor (with Mrs. Chapman as her companion), and a servant girl named Harriet, also came out in April, 1870. The writer has the distinction of being one of the two children before mentioned. This party sailed on the City of Washington, one of the swiftest and best-equipped vessels afloat. In New York they stayed at the Astor House and found American travel decidedly expensive. None of them had any notion of what pioneer life was like. Of course, they took it for granted that America was an El Dorado."

In April, 1870, Mr. Benjamin Budden, a naturalized American, came from Illinois. He was a native of Bridport, in Dorset, but had lived in America for several years. ^^ in May of the same year two brothers named YarroU and a young^man named John Brett, from Hastings, in Sussex, came to Wakefield. They lived temporarily in a "dugout" on the Geo. Taylor farm, southwest of Wakefield." Mr. Brett was a brother and Mr. Joseph YarroU the first husband of Mrs. T. C. Roscoe.^^

The completion of the company's store building was celebrated on the 15th of April, 1870. On this subject Mr. Marshall makes the following statement:

"April 15, 1870, being Good Friday, and the company's store building just finished, there was a gathering of settlers for many miles around— both English and American— whereat much tea and coffee, with edibles commensurate, were consumed. It helped to form many acquaintances in my case which have lasted to this day.""

The coming of the English colony greatly increased the number of voters

NOTK 41.— Mrs. J. Chapman. Note 43.— W. Guy.

Note 42.-H. W. C. Budden. Note 44.-W. Guy; R. O. Mackintosh.

Note 45.-Letter. Wakefield, February 18, 1907.

The Wakefield Colony. 15

in Clay county, as the following quotation from page 15 of the Plat-book will show:

"The number of votes cast in 1866 was 112; in 1867, 155; in 1868, 196; in 1869, 232; in 1870, 482; in 1871, 1003; in 1872, 955; in 1873. 1158.... The number of votes cast in 1880 was 2672."

In the year 1870 Kansas suffered from a severe drought.^" Those who are familiar with the clear, cloudless sky of a Kansas midsummer can imagine how this affected the newcomers, accustomed as they were to the humid atmosphere of England. In 1869 vegetation had been exceedingly luxuriant. Now every condition was reversed. Crops were an almost total failure and garden plants withered where they grew. The experience of the settlers seemed in almost every respect to belie the glowing reports that had lured them to the far West. On every side they murmured against the founders of the colony as the Israelites of old did against Moses and Aaron. Mr. Wake was especially blamed. They charged him with being the author of their calamities. Some years later Mr. Alexander Maitland, the secretary of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, revisited Great Britain, and during his absence the man whom he had left in charge of his property pillaged the house and tossed his papers and correspondence out of doors. After this high-handed proceeding the culprit fled to Missouri.^" About the year 1870 Mr. James Eustace also returned to England for the purpose of organizing another party of settlers. ^^ But in spite of the most strenuous efforts on the part of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company the tide of immigration was checked.''*'

IV. -THE ORGANIZATION OF THE COLONY. so

The Wakefield colony was remarkable for the number and variety of its "organizations." The most important of these were the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, the Wakefield Bridge and Ferry Company, the Agricultural and Literary Society, and the Wakefield General Market Company. The settlement also boasted a newspaper— the Wakefield Herald, printed at the Union office, in Junction City. Much difference of opinion exists as to the original name of the Wakefield paper. My father thmks that it was called The Star of Empire. Others are equally positive that from the beginning it was called the Wakefield Herald. A publication called The Star of Empire certainly did exist, a copy having formerlybeen in my possession, but it may have been simply a prospectus printed and circulated in England.. It was printed in newspaper form and bore the well-known motto from Bishop Berkeley, "Westward the star of empire takes its way." Perhaps the most likely interpretation will be to suppose that the publication referred to was issued by some other firm than the Kansas Land and Emigration Company. This is known to have

Note 46.— Wakefield Advertiser. November 8. 1894.

Note 47.-H. W. C. Budden.

Note 48.-Cf. Wakefield Herald, vol. 1. No. 3, April, 1871.

Note 49. — Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894. Rev. Richard Wake thinks that Mr. Maitland's visit to Great Britain must have been later than 1870. and that it was unconnected with the aflfairs of the company. — ( Letter from Los Angeles. Cal.. December 18, 1907. )

Note 50.— The information contained in this section is to a great extent drawn from the copy Of the Wakefield Herald now in the possession of Mrs. William Sparrowhawk.

16 The Wakefield Colony.

been the case with regard to the maps and prospectuses with which intending settlers were supplied at Junction City.

The original plan of the founders was to engage in cooperative farming on a large scale. Mr. Spence, of whom mention has previously been made, was to have been agricultural director for the entire colony. This scheme was not approved of by Mr. Wake, who urged in opposition thereto the merits of a plan which would "give each settler individual ownership of land and absolute control of the products of his own labor.''^' The cooperative system was never put into practice at Wakefield, but instead the directors agreed to adopt Mr. Wake's idea of associative immigration. It was this new plan which found expression in a number of voluntary associations, each designed to promote in some way the welfare of the community. Another feature in the organization of the colony, and which was likewise due to Mr. Wake, was the insertion of a prohibitory clause in all title-deeds to town property.

As regards the societies or corporations previously enumerated, the following items of information may be found in the Wakefield Herald, vol. 1, No. 3. April, 1871:

(1) The Kansas Land and Emigration Company, incorporated August 25. 1869. General office, Wakefield, Kan., branch oflJice, corner Tenth and Washington streets. Junction City. Directors: John Wormald, Alexander Maitland, Richard Wake, Wakefield; J. W. Bennett, John Brown, Morris. Ill; Harry D'Oyle, London, England; R. H. Drew, Sydenham, England. Officers: R. Wake, president; A. Maitland, secretary; J. Wormald, treasurer. Agents: Charles Wake, Junction City; Robert H. Drew, 2 Gresham building, Basinghall street, London, E. C.; John Miller, 13 Godliman street, London, England.

(2) The Wakefield Ferry and Bridge Company, incorporated May 30, 1870. President, James Eustace; ferryman, William Guy.

(3) The Agricultural and Literary Society. This organization was one of the most characteristic features of the colony, and its proceedings occupy considerable space in the columns of the Wakefield Herald. From the issue previously cited we take the following announcement:

"Agricultural and Literary Society. Every Wednesday evening, seven o'clock, at the hall. President, J. E. Burton; vice-president. R. Wake; secretary, T. P. Pettigrew; treasurer, J. Eustace; executive committee, Alex. Maitland, W. Eustace, C.Ingram, J. B. Quimby, R. N. Cowdery."

Of the recorded proceedings of the society we note the following:

"Wakefield, January 25, 1871. Poorly att^ided; general conversation.

"February 1. Dairy Farming, Rev. R. Wake.

"February 8. Tree Culture, Mr. Gray.

"February 14. Economy on the Farm, Mr. T. North.

' ' February 22. A discussion was held on the question of building a bridge on the Republican river at Clay Center. Messrs. J. W. Burton and others spoke against the proposition to issue county bonds to the amount of $25,000 to build the bridge. It was also stated that a bridge will be built at Wakefield for one-half the sum, which would be a greater convenience to a larger part of the country than one at Clay Center.

"March 1. Committee on public roads recommended che opening of roads (on various section hues in the vicinity of Wakefield.

"March 8. J. B. Quimby, Esq.. gave an address on 'Opening a Farm.' In accordance with a vote of the society this address was printed in full m the April number of the Wakefield Herald. (T. P. Pettigrew secretary.)"

Note 51.— Wakefield Advertiser. November 8. 1894.

The Wakefield Colony. 17

(5) The Wakefield General Market Company. In the spring of 1871 the establishment of a monthly live-stock market was proposed by Messrs. William Alsop, of Caine's creek, and John Chapman, of Wakefield. The Wakefield Herald thus announces the formation of the new company:

"We are pleased to be able to announce the opening of a monthly market at Wakefield for the sale of cattle and all kinds of live stock."

Organization: President, William Alsop; secretary, R. Wake; treasurer, J. B. Quimby; directors, W. Alsop, J. Chapman, E. Jones, J. B. Quimby, C. Fullington, R. Wake, and A. Maitland.

At the time of the publication of the April issue of the Wakefield Herald the market square was being enclosed with a board fence.

CHURCHES,,

While the various organizations pertaining to the Wakefield colony are under consideration, it will be fitting to give some account of the churches.

The Methodist Episcopal church, under the pastorate of Rev. R. Wake, met in the public hall at Wakefield. The building was situated near the northwest corner of the old market square, on the west side. The first Sunday school superintendent was Mr. James Dodson, who also held the office of county superintendent of public instruction, sHe still resides at Wakefield as its oldest inhabitant.

In his address at the old settlers' reunion, October 10, 1894, Mr. Wake gave the following particulars:

"In May, 1870, I organized a Methodist church in the room over the store building, then just erected, and preached twice each Sunday until the following March. A Sunday-school was organized, with J. S. Dodson as superintendent. The following year other preachers, Messrs. Eustace, Mullis and Thompson, assisted in supplying the pulpit, and churches were organized at Exeter and Alida, and a circuit formed reaching up the river to Riverhead, opposite Clifton, and west to OakhilL^s

The Union church, with Rev. Wm. Todd and Rev. Edward Moore as copastors, worshiped in schoolhouse No. 8, at Madura. ^^

In the early days of the settlement Mr. Todd preached at the home of Moses Younkins, on Timber creek. ^^ In 1868 the old schoolhouse at Madura, perpetuating the name of his former mission field in South India, became the center of his labors. The Madura church was afterward affiliated with the Congregational body, and when the new building was erected in Wakefield the name of "Madura Congregational Church" was retained.

The services of the Episcopal church were first held at the home of Mrs. Pearson, on section 8, in Gill township, in the spring of 1871. Mr. T. P. Pettigrew usually oflSciated as lay-reader.

"During 1871," writes Mr. J. P. Marshall, "funds were collected in Wakefield and vicinity, as well as in England and at Baltimore, to erect a stone church on the northeast corner of section 3, township 10, range 3 east. Mr. Charles Ingram donated five acres on section 3 and five acres on section 2 for church, rectory, graveyard and glebe. The building had progressed

Note 52.— J. Chapman.

Note 53.— Wakefield Advertiser, November 8. 1894.

Note 54.— Wakefield Herald, vol. 1. No. 3; Wakefield Advertiser, October 25. 1894.

Note 55.— G. W. Southwick, in the Wakefield Advertiser, November 5, 1897 (Santa Barbara. Cal., October 5. 1897.)

18 The Wake field Colony.

to the shingling of the roof when, in July, 1872, the first tornado experienced by the newcomers leveled it to the ground." =»

The destruction of the church building by the tornado of July, 1872— in the nature of the case a serious disaster— may perhaps account for the statement in the Plat-book that the first vestry meeting was held on October 14, 1874. Rev. H. H. Hickox, who was then rector, is mentioned in Wilder's Annals of Kansas in connection with relief delivered to sufferers from the grasshopper scourge of 1874-'75. The present church building at St. John's, on the site presented by Mr. Charles Ingram, was dedicated in the spring of

The Baptist church at Uniondale, northwest of Wakefield, was organized May 6, 1873. To this congregation belonged several families from the southeast of England, particularly the Cowells and Yarrows, from Henham, near Saffron Walden (County Essex). ^8 Another pioneer of this community was William Kynaston, who came out from England in April, 1871. He was one of the charter members of the church.'^'-'

A few words may be added concerning the town site of Wakefield as it was in the early days of the English settlement. The town lies in the angle between two bluffs, one of which, facing eastward, overlooks the river; the other, extending toward the south, marks the point at which a small creek flows out into the river valley. The outward slope of the northern ridge, known as Cedar Bluff, is almost precipitous and clothed with a fairly dense growth of timber. The eastern brow of Cedar Bluff affords an extensive view. An engraving, which occurs in the Plat-book, professes to give some idea of Wakefield as it appeared at the close of its first decade. This, however, does not add much to our knowledge. Few of the details are recognizable, and the perspective is badly distorted. When the Enghsh settlers came, in 1869, the only dwelling north of the creek was the house built by James Gilbert, some ten years earlier. Its position is described as follows: "The old log house was just south of Mr. Lumb's present home. Depression of cellar is still visible in Une with E street south of the city limits."""

With the influx of settlers in 1869, building operations at once began. Messrs. Marshall and Woodward put up the company's office and the store and public hall, both on the west side of the old market square. On the sections adjoining Wakefield on the west, dwellings were built in 1869 by James Gibbons, J. G. Billingham, and T. P. Pettigrew.s^ My father's house was built early in 1870. The first dwellings in town were those of Benjamin Moutelle, on Third avenue (now owned by Mrs. Shafner), and R. E. Cowdery, corner of Fourth avenue and D street. ^2 Of the two earliest dwellings

Note 56.- J. P. Marshall. Wakefield, August 4, 1907.

Note 57.— Plat-book, p. 19. Note 58.- J. G. Cowell, January 25. 1908.

Note 59.— "The organization of the Uniondale church was [effected] May 6. 1873. Charter members were: Wm. Kynaston, Mary Yarrow. Amelia Randall, Arthur Rothwell. Jasper Cowell was ordained as first pastor of the church, August 14. 1877."— (T. Cowell, February 4,

Note 60.— J. P. Marshall. Note 61.— J. G. Billingham.

Note 62.— Listof earliest buildings in Wakefield, revised by Messrs. J. P. Marshall and W. E. Lumb: Office of company ( Spooner building ). 1869, block 64, D street; company's store, February. 1870, block 64, D street; Moutelle House, Third avenue, first dwelling built: Cowdery's house, 1870 (now part of Humbert's house), blocK 46, corner Fourth and D streets: Gillett's (now Alsop's), built by Porter, block 36, corner G street and Fifth avenue; Rev. R. Wake's ( F. Dodson's shop ), 1870, block 54, corner D street and Third avenue; Eustace's house, 1870, block 48, corner B street and Fourth avenue; Thomas's house, 1870, block 48, B street: Adamson's (now Batchelor's),

The Wakefield Colomj. 19

on the ridge of the west bluff, that erected by Messrs. John and Paul Guard (G street near Fourth avenue), was afterwards blown away by a tornado. On the block just north of this stands the house built by S. B. Porter, but shortly after occupied by Mr. Gillett. Rev. Richard Wake's house, corner of D street and Third avenue, was built in 1870. This house, according to another source, was subsequently occupied by Thomas Goosey. His son died here, and was buried on their farm in Gill township. The Pioneer Hotel was built in 1870, and the old schoolhouse in 1873. Business life gathered about the company's store at the northwest corner of the market square. The upstairs room, known as the "hall," in which the Methodist Episcopal church worshiped on Sunday, and where the discussions of the Literary and Agricultural Society were held on Wednesday evenings, was likewise a center for social gatherings. The entrance was by an exterior stairway at the back of the building. For the writer, some of childhood's earliest recollections are associated with the Sunday service or other gatherings held in the public hall. Of the business affairs of the colony a partial estimate can be drawn from the columns of the Wakefield Herald.^'^ Mr. Alex. Maitland appears among the professional men,* and we observe that the company offers 22,000 acres of land for sale. About the same time Mr. Gillett was prominent as a cattleman,! and so likewise was Henry Buckle, the agent for Mr. Clinch, of Witney. The establishment of the monthly market was intended to stimulate the cattle trade.

At Junction City the settlers came in touch with the affairs of the wider world. During the autumn and winter of 1870-'71, the war between France and Germany was in progress,**^ and those of the Wakefield colony whom business called to the city were struck with the interest which our German fellow citizens took in the conflict.

With the opening of the RepubHcan Valley branch of the Union Pacific railroad the first stage in the development of Wakefield draws to a close. Two years earlier the materials for the building of my father's house had been hauled by ox-team from Junction City. Prices were high in Junction, and with the additional cost of transportation almost prohibitive. The railroad was opened in 1872, when Charles Wake received the position of stationmaster. Geo. Taylor, a member of the Nebraska party, was the first mail-carrier.

v.— COLONISTS FROM THE UPPER THAMES VALLEY.

In spite of the severe check which the stream of immigration received m the year 1870, it subsequently underwent a partial revival. The Wakefield Herald thus notices the coming of the next large party of settlers:

"We learn that James Eustace will leave England for Wakefield on the

1870, block 49, comer B street and Fourth avenue; Paul and John Guard, 1870. block 43. G street, "wrecked by the cyclone"; Pioneer Hotel, 1870, block 63, E street: E. Jones. 1870, and R. Alsop's, 1870, both on First avenue, block 79; Jardine's house (now Moutrie's ), 1871; David Haden's house and shop, 1871. block 74, E street; schoolhouse, 1873, block 56, E street.

Note 63. —List of business advertisements: Dry-groods and groceries, Budden and Margetts; butchers, Alsop & Jones: blacksmith, David Haden; boot and shoemaker, J. Moutelle; carpenters and builders, James Dodson & Sons, B. F. Jevons; painters and glaziers. James South, J. Spooner; bricklayer and plasterer, John Chambers; tailor and cutter, (Isaiah) Jevons; lime burners, Harris & Downing; teamsters, J. Haden, A. Shrives, E. Dodson, and S. B. Porter; Pioneer Hotel, W. C. Thompson. — ( Wakefield Herald. April, 1871, Mrs. Wm. Sparrowhawk).

* Postmaster and notary public— Mrs. Isabella Maitland (Seattle, Wash.)

tJ. P. Marshall. Wakefield, February 18, 1907.

Note 64. — Battle of Weissenburg, August 4, 1870; capitulation of Paris, January 28, 1871.

20' The Wakefield Colony.

5th of April, accompanied by a large party of English agriculturists, whom he has prevailed upon to remove to the broad prairies of Kansas. Golden opportunities await them here."*^

It was, perhaps, the business relations that existed between some of the Oxfordshire colonists and George Grant, esq., the founder of the English colony at Victoria, Ellis county, that led Noble L. Prentis to place the beginning of Wakefield in 1871. In his History of Kansas, page 146, he says:

"In 1871 the Kansas Pacific sold to the Swedish colony, in Saline county, 22,000 acres; to an English colony in Clay county, 32,000 acres; and to a Welsh colony, in Riley county, 19,000 acres. In 1873. George Grant, of England, purchased of the Kansas Pacific Company 50,000 acres in the eastern portion of Ellis county, with the design of colonizing English people of means."

So far as the date is concerned, the historian is evidently mistaken, for at the time spoken of the English colony in Clay county had been in existence very nearly two years. The efforts made in 1871 to retrieve the fortunes of the Wakefield colony brought it more prominently before the public eye, and may, not unnaturally, have created the impression that it originated at that time.

The first party belonging to the new stream of immigration we shall term the "Sparrowhawk party," Mr. Robert Sparrowhawk being one of its leading members. The Wakefield Herald, as we have seen, states that it was conducted by James Eustace, esq., and fixes the date of its departure from England on April 5, 1871. Mr. Eustace, it will be remembered, came out on the City of Washington in 1870, and had in the meantime revisited England.

The names of the following persons belonging to the Sparrowhawk party were furnished by Mr. E. R. Hawes and Mrs. Wm. Sparrowhawk: Mr. and Mrs. R. Sparrowhawk and family, from Aston under Wychwood, Oxfordshire; Mr. and Mrs. Tilbury and family (Mr. Tilbury afterwards returned to England and was a curate at Exeter); Mr. and Mrs. Shirley and family; Mr. and Mrs. E. R. Hawes (settled on the Geo. Taylor farm; are now living in Wakefield. Mr. Hawes is one of my informants concerning the party of which he was a member); Mr. and Mrs. Cox and family; Mr. and Mrs. James Loader and family; Mr. Geo. Bettridge; Mr. Herman Walter; Mr. William Thurlow; Mr. Richard Jones (brother of Mrs. James Loader); Mr. and Mrs. Arkell and family; Mr. and Mrs. Parsons; Mrs. Wightman (lived just east of Tom Keller's place).

Most of these came from Oxfordshire and adjoining counties, the streams of which flow into the Thames, and may therefore be described as settlers from the Upper Thames valley.

Among those who came from Oxfordshire about this time were the Clinches. Their names were Harold, Charles and Duncan Clinch. The two first named were sons, the third a nephew, of a wealthy brewer in Witney on the Windrush.8« Witney, so the local saying afiirms, is famed for four B's— "beauty, bread, beer, and blankets." During their stay at Wakefield Messrs. Charles and Harold Clinch engaged in sheep and cattle raising. Their father supplied them with ample capital for the enterprise— not less than forty or fifty thousand dollars, it is said. In addition, Duncan Clinch received an allowance of seventy-five dollars a month from his father."'

Note 65. -Wakefield Herald, vol. 1. No. 3, April, 1871.

Note 66.— E. Eustace, T. Beldham. Note 67.-T. Beldham.

The Wakefield Colony. 21

Frank Harris, an experienced shepherd, was commissioned to bring out some sixty-five or seventy pure-blooded sheep of the best English breeds. The Clinches also imported several head of choice cattle and two Clydesdale stallions that subsequently took the premium at the Topeka state fair."** The management of the enterprise, perhaps on account of the youth and inexperience of the Clinch boys, was in the hands of Henry Buckle. He came out with them as agent for Mr. Clinch, sr., and took up a claim on the southwest quarter of section 24, in Gill township, and there the members of the party lived for at least two years. »« It was his early death that threw all into confusion. Henry Buckle died suddenly at Wamego while en route with a herd of cattle from Missouri, and the right of homestead passed to his father. Accordingly Mr. Buckle, sr., came out to Kansas, bringing with him the remaining members of his household,^" and the Clinches moved the stock to the place now owned by Richardson, adjoining Ed. Southwick's on the north. When the Buckle family took possession of the claim on section 24, Gill township, the Clinch boys made their headquarters nearer Wakefield. They kept "bachelors' hall" at the Haynes farm, which at that time was the property of Mr. Lewinton Howse."' But in spite of abundant means the young men did not adapt themselves to pioneer life. Their domestic arrangements and housekeeping are said to have resembled those of primitive man, and many anecdotes are told of their father's disgust when he visited Wakefield.

Among other settlers from Oxfordshire were H. B. Jones, afterwards a druggist at Industry, Kan.'^ Mr. Thomas Irons is said to have come from the same county. Messrs. Cumber and ( Charles ) Harris, who held claims on the south halves of sections 26 and 22 respectively, in Gill township, were also Oxfordshire people." The Buckle family, to whom reference has already been made, were from Chawbury, in Wychwood (Oxfordshire), having lived on a farm that had been cleared under the disafforesting act."^ The family consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Buckle, three sons (Ted, Will and Charley) and two or three daughters, one of whom married Rev. J. H. Young, an Episcopal clergyman." The Buckle homestead was that previously occupied by the Clinches, but a claim was also taken up by E. T. Buckle, one of the sons, on the south half of the northeast quarter of section 26,"" in the same township. Rev. J. H. Young lived on the south half, on the farm now owned by my brother, Mr. Herbert Chapman.

It was about this time that George Grant, esq., was engaged in founding the English colony at Victoria, Ellis county." The settlement was planned on a much greater scale than the Wakefield colony. Mr. Grant purchased

Note 68. -T. Beldham.

Note 69.-J. P. Marshall (Wakefield, February 18, 1907).

Note 70. -J. P. Marshall (Wakefield, September 31. 1906).

Note 71.— Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Lumb. T. Beldham.

Note 72.— Plat-book, p. 21. ( H. Bateman Jones, M. D.)

Note 73. — W. Guy; the second Marshall map, section 26, township 10, range 3, section 22, township 10, range 3.

Note 74.— E. Eustace. Note 75.— W. Guy.

NOTE76.-J. P. Marshall (Wakefield. September 31. 1906).

Note 77. — "May 6, 1873, Geo. Grant imports stock for a 60,000-acre farm at Victoria, Ellis county."— (Wilder's Annals of Kansas.)

22 The Wakefield Colony.

50,000 acres of land and erected the railway station and hotel, as well as a church, at his. own expense.

"He proceeded," says Mr. R. T. Batchelor, "to arrange with the Kansas Pacific Railroad Company for the erection of a fine two-story stone building on the right of way, consisting of thirteen rooms, part to be used as a depot and the remainder as an hotel. After concluding these and other arrangements, such as building fences, shelter for stock, etc., Mr. Grant returned to his home and proceeded to perfect his arrangements for the transportation of his fellow colonists. He very soon had everything in train for the accomplishment of his cherished hopes, and impressed all with whom he came in contact with his business ability and his attention to every detail. A few of the best breeds of sheep, a bunch of the finest Short-horn cattle and some full-blood draft horses were soon purchased and on the way. As there had been no possibility of providing feed at their destination, they were consigned to Wakefield and were wintered on the farm now owned by Mr Richardson, but known at the time as Chill creek. Mr. Grant was soon surrounded by quite a number of wealthy men, many of them connected with the aristocracy of England and Scotland, who purchased large tracts of land and brought in thousands of sheep. "'^

In the meantime matters went from bad to worse at Chill creek. The Clinch brothers ran up bills from $100 to $150 a year for tobacco and similar luxuries, and the ranch proved anything but a success. At length Mr. Clinch, senior, decided to come out and see things for himself. He was thoroughly incensed at his sons' slipshod ways, and after satisfying himself that the enterprise would not succeed, he sold out and took his sons and nephew back to England."" The flock of sheep were disposed of to George Grant, then engaged in founding the English colony at Victoria. »" While Mr. Clinch was in Wakefield a cattle show was held at which he presided as judge. In this capacity he awarded the prize of a silver cup, for the best bull shown, to the Gifford brothers of Hillside, ^i Mr. Clinch had already sold out and returned to England when Mr. Edwin Eustace visited Ellis county in the spring of 1874.

The events just related may be said to close the first chapter in the history of Wakefield. The colony rapidly lost its associative character. The monthly market was early discontinued, and one by one the remaining corporations, including the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, passed out of existence. The following account of the financial history of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company has been furnished by Rev. Richard Wake:

" When by reason of the drought of 1870 and the short-crop years following, we were unable to carry the enterprise through— and so surrendered our contract to the railroad company— it was currently reported that the company had made deeds to various parties and failed to make their title secure. This was in no case true where purchaser took quarter-sections, as in every

Note 78.— R. T. Batchelor. in Wakefield Advertiser, vol. 10. No. 29. January 21, 1898.

Note 79.— T. Beldham; Mr. and Mrs. Lumb.

Note 80. — E. Eustace, J. P. Marshall. "My recollection is," adds Mr, Marshall, "that Mr, Clinch, sr., met Mr. Grant (the proprietor of the Victoria colony) here in Kansas, and when he (Mr. C. ) had decided to return to England made a sale of all his blooded stock to him. The Clinches did not stay long at the Quimby creek place, and when they left the stock was looked after by a nephew of Mr. Grant, 'Aleck ' Grant. The whole business was a wretched waste of money, both with the Clinches and the Victoria colonists, resulting from an utter lack of knowledge of the country and its possibilities at that time."

Note 81. -H. W. C. Budden.

24 The Wakefield Colony.

such instance the railroad company was paid in full and the title made good. But there were a few cases— three or four— in which we had deeded eightyacre lots informing the parties that we had not perfected title, and could not immediately do so, because the railroad company refused to make deeds for less than the number of acres described in the original contract. And as we could not pay for and hold the additional eighty acres, we offered to pay back the money, which, after some delay, we did. I myself indorsed the company's notes personally, ultimately making full settlement.

■' The fact that none of our purchasers lost by our failure did not gain as rapid currency as the report that we had defrauded those who had trusted us. The old proverb that 'a lie will travel a league while truth is putting on his boots,' was illustrated in our experience. I may say also that not all our shareholders lost all their investments. Messrs. Brown and Rose, of Illinois, surrendered shares for land, and Mr. Wormald did likewise. Some of us who held on to the end did not have as good opportunity to make ourselves whole. But v^e came out of it with a large amount of experience. "

Several later settlers came from Shropshire, followed in the course of the Alsop party. Messrs. Benjamin Adams, William Kynaston, and Ralph Fowles, sailed from Liverpool on April 1, 1871, and landed in New York after a nine days voyage. The two former settled in Union township. Mrs. Adams came out in the following August. ^2 A number of colonists came to the vicinity of Wakefield under the influence of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company but without connecting themselves with the Wakefield colony. The Rundles and Winsors came to Junction City and took up claims in Dickinson county. Those of the Wakefield colonists, the time of whose coming is not definitely ascertained, will be noticed at greater length in the following account of the distribution and location of the settlers.

VI. -THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE EARLY SETTLERS.

[Remark.— The following notation will be employed to define the situation of farms belonging to the settlers mentioned. Fractional expressions will be used to denote the subdivisions both of sections and quarter-sections; thus, SV2 of NE^/4 of sec. 26 is to be read "the south half of the northeast quarter of section 26."]

In describing the distribution of the Wakefield colonists, the writer will be guided chiefly by the second Marshall map on page 503 of this article. Many incidents of a descriptive nature, as well as many particulars concerning the settlers themselves, have been furnished by M. William Guy, of Wakefield. The map, to which reference has already been made, was drawn by Mr. J. P. Marshall about the year 1874. The area which it described is bounded on the east by the line running between sections 4 and 5 (33-32) in Republican township, and on the west by the second section-line in Athelstane township. It includes, therefore, the whole of township 10, range 3 east (Gill township), and parts of the townships adjoining it on the east and west respectively. The town site of Wakefield, lying mainly in section 5, township 10, range 4 east, occupies the upper right-hand corner of the map,

THE AMERICAN SETTLERS.

'Our -survey of the district occupied by the American settlers will begin with section 8. The proprietors of the northwest quarter of this section were Messrs. Gilbert and Streeter. They were Americans, and had taken up their claims before the coming of the English colonists. Mr. Ed. Southwick, the owner of Slg of SEI4, was the nephew of Rev. William Todd,"^ of

Note 82.— Mrs. B. Adams.

Note 83.— Rev. William Todd was born at Marcellus, Onondaga county. New York. March 8, 1801. He graduated in 1821 from Hamilton College, and entered the Theological Seminary at

The Wakefield Coloyiy. 25

Madura. The occupants of the north half of the section will be mentioned in our account of the English settlers. The SW^ j of section 8 was owned by the State Agricultural College, established at Manhattan in 1863, and reorganized in 1873.

On section 17, the S'i was owned by Mr. J. B. Quimby and the NEI4 by Mr. W. E. Payne (N^.s) and Rev. Wm. Todd (S^OThe Todd house is still standing and is a typical representative of the better class of pioneer dwellings. The deep-set windows, the wood-work of native walnut lumber, the rooms long and low, all characterize the dwelling as unlike anything erected since the coming of the railroad. School district No. 8, and subsequently the church organized there, derived their name from the fact of Mr. Todd having been a missionary at Madura, in India.

"It makes me realize the flight of time" writes Mr. G. W. Southwick, ' ' to look back about forty years when as a small boy in the city of Leavenworth I watched the purchase of an ox-team and wagon loaded with stores for the new home in Clay county. Driving cattle was a new business to the home missionary, Uncle Todd, and the trip of 150 miles was a novel one to his wife, Aunt Ruth.* It was the time of exceptional spring winds, when tumbleweeds were numerous and on the go all day, which gave a weird appearance to the landscape of what seemed illimitable prairie, and caused a little homesick feeling to touch the company. There were many things to learn about ox-driving. After suffering sundry tricks, with years of experience we learned that it was best not to get out on the 'off side' — but we did not know it on this first trip. Of those who took us into their homes and made us welcome, many have crossed the ' boundless river. ' We remember the kindness of Mr. and Mrs. Fullington, who proved the congenial friends of the family for many years, [and] the good-hearted, whole-souled Moses Younkin, who waded the river and got the log canoe to transport the preacher across. Think of it ! For months we traveled with our ox-team

Auburn. In 1820 he married Miss Lucy Brownell. In June, 1833, Mr. Todd and wife went to India as missionaries under the American Board. He lost his wife and married the widow of a brother missionary named Woodward In February, 1839, ill health compelled him to return to America. He preached at various points in New York and Pennsylvania until 1858, when his adopted children, J. B. Quimby and W. E. Payne and families, concluded to settle in Kansas, and he came with them. He had a third wife, named Ruth S.. a delightful woman, who shared with him his pioneering in Kansas. Mr. Todd died August 10, 1874, and Mrs. Ruth S. Todd died in Chicago during the World's Fair. Mrs. Ruth S. Todd, in 1874. prepared and published an extensive sketch of her husband, but did not mention herself. Geo. W. Martin, then editor of the Junction City Union, paid the following tribute to Mr. Todd:

"In the fall of 1861. learning that there was no preaching in Junction City, Mr. Todd left hifarm on the Republican, and came to town, accompanied by his wife, who shared his self-sacris ficing. missionary spirit. The difficulties of that day, in the absence of the support of Him who feeds the ravens, would have been simply overwhelming. Mr. Todd preached the Word during the years 1862 and 1863 practically without salary, putting an absolute faith in God for his food. And yet while, commercially speaking, he had nothing to get it with, and no hope that he would have anything with which to get it, food was always provided. The absence of anything in the house to eat did not in the slightest daunt the old man's spirit. He arrived in town with sixty dollars in gold in his pocket. He exhausted that and such as he could raise by chopping wood and doing stone work. He gave himself no thought about hardships. He was then feeble, having lost his health in India, but with the same inspiration, which forty years before had led him to that foreign field, he labored in this frontier post, while the least possible strength lasted, with great zeal, earnestness, and success. As a man Mr. Todd was without hypocrisy or dissembling. Hisactionsandhis words were universally accepted as the very height of sincerity. There was no such element in him as self. He was a man of vigorous intellect, and an earnest and effective public speaker. His sermons were full of thought and originality, and very peculiar in their simplicity. He talked as though his hearers were children, and the love of Jesus was the absorbing element of his religion and his ministrations. On two sides of the globe this simple, honest, earnest-hearted, godly man, though dead, yet speaketh, and in the ages_to come, wliile the conflict with sin lasts or a heart beats, his impress will be found."

*Mrs. Ruth S. Todd was a lady of exceptional culture, and, like her husband, took a life-long interest in missions. The writer was frequently the guest (1884-'92) of the family circle at the Todd homestead, and remembers with pleasure the fact that Mrs Todd encouraged his earliest efforts in the field of history.

26 The Wakefield Colony.

every Sunday to Mr. Younkin's hospitable house, where Uncle Todd held service, and the singing— to my boyish taste this was the most edifying part of the worship— was led by Mr. Gill."^*

Mr. J. B. Quimby, who settled in Republican township in 1857, owned the S^o of sec. 17, and, subsequently, also NWI4 of sec. 20. From him Quimby Creek derives its name.

The Ei.< of SE,!^ of sec. 20 was owned by Doctor Burt, who had been an army surgeon in the civil war. The doctor and his wife {nee Locke), were both of old colonial descent.

"Dr. Asahel Burt, jr., was born in Vermont, September 28, 1828, where his early days were spent upon a farm. When sixteen years old he ran away from home and joined a whaling vessel, in which he served three years, going to all parts of the globe." He was married in New York to Mary S. Locke on November 28, 1850. Becoming acquainted with Dr. J. V. P. Quackenbush, afterwards surgeon-general of the state of New York, he entered the Albany Medical College, where he graduated with the degree of M. D. "He entered the army as assistant surgeon of the One Hundred and Thirtyninth New York volunteer infantry, and after about a year was made full surgeon, and was mustered out as such with his regiment at the close of the war. During his army life he was surgeon-in-chief of his brigade, served on several boards of examination, served in the general hospital at Hampton, Va., and in the field hospitals of the Tenth, Eighteenth and Twentyfourth army corps, besides doing his share of surgical work in the field." He was present at the battles of Williamsburg, May 5, 1862; Fair Oaks, May 31-June 1; the advance to the vicinity of Richmond in June of the same year; at Cold Harbor, June 3, 1864; Bermuda Hundred, on the 16th; the siege of Petersburg, and many other actions less known to the general reader. "On September 29, 1864, he was in the battle of Fort Harrison, where Gen. G. J. Stannard was wounded, and assisted in removing his left arm. The G. A. R. post in Wakefield, Kan., was named for General Stannard."

Doctor Burt came to Kansas in March, 1868, and spent his later years on his farm in Republican township. Although a Methodist by persuasion, his early associations with the Madura community led him to attend the Congregational church. He died at his home, April 5, 1901, in his seventy-second year.*""' Mrs. Burt traced her ancestry to William Locke, of Woburn. Her great grandfather, David Locke, born 1740, as we read in the published history of the family, was a soldier both in the Seven Years' war and in the War of Independence. " He was a soldier in the old French war. at Crown Point and Ticonderoga. In the War of the Revolution he was a volunteer who went to the assistance of General Gates in September, 1777, and was present at the surrender of Burgoyne. He was an influential man in the church, of which he was a most exemplary member, "^e

In the same neighborhood with Doctor and Mrs. Burt lived W. P. Gates, who, as a mere lad, had also seen military service in the civil war. In an ad-

NoTE 84.— Gilbert W. Southwick. in the Wakefield Advertiser, November 5, 1897. (Santa Barbara, Cal.. Octobers. 1897.)

Note 85.-The Clay Center Times. April 11. 1901.

Note 86.— Mary Smith Locke, born 1829; papre 225 of "A Genealogical and Historical Record of the Descendants of Wm. Locke, of Woburn, 1853; Boston and Cambridge " ( Jas. Monroe & Co )

The Wakefield Colony. 27

dress on October 10, 1894, Doctor Burt mentions a settler named French, who Hkewise Hved in that vicinity.

In the district north of Wakefield the Avery family had taken up claims before the coming of the English colonists. The first to settle in that vicinity was Mr. Albert Avery. His brother, Mr. Henry Avery, came some time later. They were natives of Orleans county, Vermont, and were of English descent. The following is an account of the coming of the Avery family to this country:

"We now take up the record of our earliest ancestor (Dr. Wm. Avery) who crossed the Atlantic. He in 1650 cast in his lot with the settlers of the town of Dedham, Mass., bringing with him his wife, Margaret, and three children, from the Parish of Barkham, county of Berkshire, England."

The colonial Averys of the first two generations were of English birth. Rev. John Avery, born 1685, grandson of Dr. Wm. Avery, and his son Job, born 1722-'3, lived in Truro, on Cape Cod. George (1757-1859), was a son of Job Avery and Jean Thatcher, and grandfather of Messrs. Albert and Henry Avery, fought in the War of Independence, and after its close resided in Plainfield, N. H., on the east bank of the Connecticut river. He left an account of his "Tryals and Captivity" during the war. George Avery, son of the preceding, after living many years in Orleans county, Vermont, came with his family to Kansas, and died near Wakefield, September 29, 1889, at the home of his daughter, Mrs. Elkins.«^

Mr. Albert Avery's farm, on Caine's creek, afterward purchased by his brother Henry, consisted of parts of sections 18 and 19, township 9 south, range 4 east. Albert died at Wakefield, February 1, 1875.

The pioneer settler in Gill township was Mr. Kirby. His claim included the SM of SEI4 of sec. 13 and NU of NE>4 of sec. 24. In the year 1868 his house was the only dwelling in the township. '^'^

With regard to Athelstane township, th^ following information is to be found in Plat-book (p. 21): "The first settlers in this township were William Price and his son Martin, who came February 17, 1860."

THE ENGLISH SETTLERS. Settlers in township 10, range U east. The town site of Wakefield consisted of 120 acres in the NW34 of sec. 5, and the two "eighties" (E>^ of NEi^^ of sec. 6, and N}^ of SWI4 of sec. 5) adjoining it on the west and south respectively. In section 6, the east half was owned by Mr. R. T. Batchelor, the west half by Mr. James Gibbons, both of whom were members of the pioneer party. When the Marshall map was drawn the Gibbons homestead was owned by William Allaway. The W>e of NEI4, adjoining the town site of Wakefield, was owned by Mr. John Chapman. An account of my father's family has been given in connection with the list of those who came out in the steamship Nebraska in 1869. My mother was the second daughter of Mr. William Hellier, of Poundsford ( Pitminister), near Taunton. The Helliers had been settled for several generations at Hennock, near Bovey Tracey (Devon). Mrs. Wm. Hellier was a daughter of Edmund Rich, esq., of Cross House, Over Stowey. The Riches of Stowey, Butcombe, and Bagborough were descended from "Samuel Rich,

Note 87.— Avery family record; Dedham Branch of the Avery Family in America, pp. 19, 322327. (Plymouth, Mass.. 1893.)

Note 88. -Wakefield Advertiser. October 25, 1894.

28 The Wakefield Colony.

esq., gentleman,"'^'' who flourished in the last quarter of the seventeenth century. On the extinction of the elder branch of the family (in 1815) my maternal great-grandfather removed from Butcombe to Over Stowey.

The west half of the section was divided in four "eighties," lying east and west. The original proprietors were Messrs. Pettigrew (Ni2 0f NWI4), Billingham (S^o of same), Geo. Taylor (N^^ of SWJ4), and John Spooner (SI2 of same), all of whom came out in the steamship Nebraska in 1869. In 1873-'74 the Geo. Taylor farm was owned by E. R. Hawes, who came out with Mr. Sparrowhawk's party.

Section 7, lying southwest of Wakefield, was assigned to the directors of the colony— the NEI4 to Mr. John Wormald, the NWI4 to Mr. Alex. Maitland, the SWI4 to Rev. Richard Wake, and the SEI4 to Mr. R. H. Drew. Of the proprietors mentioned, Mr. Drew never became an actual settler, although he paid a visit to the colony in the early days and stayed with my father at his farm on section 6. In addition to the quarter-section mentioned above, Mr. Alex. Maitland owned the "eighty" (in twp. 10, range 3 east) adjoining it on the west, and also the S^o of SW34 of section 5, adjoining the town site of Wakefield. He erected a dwelling-house on the firstnamed eighty, and also commenced to build a stone residence on the farm lying south of the town site. The southeast angle of the last-named building, situated on the east slope of the bluff just north of Denny Mason's, was standing not many years since. Some trees had sprung up under the shelter of the wall, and from the roadside a doorway or window aperture was visible. I think the material was afterwards removed for building purposes.

About the year 1873-'74, the Wormald quarter-section appears to have changed hands. At some time later the farm adjoining Wakefield on the south passed into the hands of Mr. Wormald, and became known as the Wormald farm.

The proprietors of section 18 (adjoining section 7 on the south) were Messrs. Skinner, Dodson and Dibben. The northeast quarter of the section belonged to the State Agricultural College. Concerning Mr. Skinner, I find the following entry in the Forty-seventh Annual Session of the Congregational Association (pp. 42, 43):

"Edward Skinner was born in Old Dalby, Leicestershire, England, August 24, 1837. He commenced preaching in England when eighteen years of age. Came to America May 14, 1873. Pastor of Madura (Wakefield) and Milford churches in Kansas from 1873 to December, 1879. Church was built in Milford during his pastorate, which was the first church in Kansas built without missionary aid.... Died at his home in Blue Rapids, Kan., January 8, 1901."

Mr. Skinner's homestead was the N^o of NW>4 of sec. 18. On the SEI4 Mr. A. Gaston appears to have been preceded by a settler named Isaac Jacobus.^"

On section 19 the proprietors were Messrs. Mark Dodson, Emory White,

Note 89.— Mural tablet in the parish church. Over Stowey.

Note 90. — Marshall map. section 18. township 10. rang'e 4; "With regard to the Jacobus land, I find that the first settler on that land was George Purinton, who lived on it (but I do not remember any house or remains of one). He sold it to Mr. Jacobus, who was a Congregational minister in Junction City, an old man, I believe. A [leek] Gaston bought it from him or his assigns. The other piece of the A[leck] Gaston place was first settled by H. W. Brown who sold it to Charles Purinton and by whom it was sold to Gaston."— J. P. Marshall.

The Wakefield Colony. 29

and William Gaston. All these were of American birth. The Gaston family were Scotch-Irish Pennsylvanians."'

The SI 2 of sec. 20 was owned by Messrs. Walters, Gates, Eustace and Burt. The Walters and Eustace families were English. The NEI4 of sec. 30 was owned by Messrs. Lumb (N^o) and Wheelright (Si;>)- They were Yorkshire people. It may deserve mention that Mr. Lumb (now residing at Wakefield) possesses a copy of the "Breeches Bible" printed in 1599, so-called from its curious rendering of Gen. 3:7, that has come down from the reign of Queen Elizabeth. No entries appear on sections 29 and 31. The Wio of sec. 32 has been mentioned as belonging to the State Agricultural College. The proprietors of the east half of the same sections were Messrs. Thurlow and Lawton. The N^o of NEI4 belonged to William Eustace, whose homestead was on section 20. Mr. Robert Sparrowhawk came out with a large party in April, 1871, and settled on the NEI4 of sec. 28.^2 jjig former home was at Aston under Wychwood (Oxfordshire). A curious passage in Florence of Worcester's Chronicle shows that this surname is a survival of an Anglo-Saxon proper name current in the Upper Thames valley in the days of Edward the Confessor The entry reads: "A. D. 1050. Spearhafoc [Sparrowhawk], abbot of Abingdon, was elected bishop of London, but was ejected by King Edward before consecration." "^ The circumstance is remarkable, because Anglo-Saxon proper names fell into complete disuse soon after the conquest. J. T. Tait and H. S. Walters also held claims on section 28. ^^

Settlers in township 10 south, range 3 east. We shall begin our survey of the township with the northeast corner— the point nearest Wakefield. Here, on section 1, the NEI4 belonged to Mr. T. P. Pettigrew. Forty acres of the SEI4 adjoining the Spooner farm oh the west appear to have belonged to John Spooner. On section 12 there were eight proprietors. The E^o of the NEI4, adjoining his quarter-section in Republican township, belonged to Mr. Alex. Maitland. Alexander Maitland was born May 7, 1838, in the parish of Auchterless, Aberdeen, Scotland, and came of a race of gentleman farmers who have lived on the same farms for over four hundred years. Before coming to this country he was in business in London. He was one of the founders of Wakefield and a director of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company. In 1880 he removed to the Pacific coast. He died at his home in Seattle, August 30, 1905.* The Eig of the SE>4 of sec. 12, belonged to Rev. Richard Wake. With his permission I quote the following biographical sketch:

"I was born November 18, 1831, in a Hampshire village a few miles from Winchester. Enjoyed only such educational advantages as private schools of ordinary grade in that day afforded. In early manhood I entered the ministry of the Wesleyan Reform church, but after a year's labor in Northhamptonshire, I came in 1854 to this country and united with the Methodist Episcopal church, of which I have been a minister until now." ''^

Without repeating the account of Mr. Wake's colonial experiences,

* Mrs. Isabella Maitland. Note 91. -S. S. Gaston.

Note 92.— Plat-book, section 28. township 10, range 4 east.

Note 93. — Chronicle, A. D. 1050: Spearha focus abbas Abbandoniensis Lundonise prxsulatum suscepit, sed antequam esset consecratus, a rege Edwardo est ejectus.

Note 94.— Platbook, section 28. Note 95.— Letter, December 18, 1907.

30 The Wakefield Colony.

which has been given elsewhere, it will suffice to say that he remained with the colony through the period of its early struggles and bore no common part in its hardships. He was the founder of the Methodist church in Wakefield and a lifelong advocate of the temperance cause. Under the date of May 4, 1907, he says: "My brother and I are probably the only surviving members of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company, Mr. Maitland having died suddenly m Seattle in September, 1905, and Mr. Wormald some time previously in Chicago."

The W,^2 of NEI4 was the homestead of Benjamin Budden. The E^^ and WI2 of NWI4 belonged to Messrs. Eustace and Cowdery, respectively. R. N. Cowdery came from the neighborhood of Salisbury, in Wiltshire; Mr. Eustace was from Oxfordshire. The W^o of SEI4 belonged to Dr. Charles Hewitt; the Eio of SWI4 to Jason Withers; the WU to Arthur Marshall, a brother of J. P. Marshall.**" There were two Withers brothers, Ralph and Jason. Jason was a son-in-law of Mr. Cowdery.

On section 13, the S>2 of SE^i belonged to Mr. Kirby. The W^o of NWI4 was the property of Mr. J. P. Marshall. (This claim was originally purchased by Mr. James Marshall.) Mr. Marshall, to whom we owe the map upon which this account is largely based, was a native of New Airesford, in Hampshire. On section 24, the NW^4 belonged to D. H. Dudy, an American and a veteran of the civil war. The S^o of NEi^4, adjoining Mr. Kirby 's farm, belonged to an Englishman named Thomas Goosey. A son of Mr. Goosey died in Wakefield and was buried on his father's farm. On the S3^ several of the names have been rewritten. The entries are: SEI4, E^o, Gaston; W,i.<, T. K. White; SWI4, F.%, ( WiUiam) Ware; ^H, Buckle, f. K. White was an American; William Ware, a Devonshire man. The latter had lived for many years in the United States. On the NWI4 of section 25 appears the name Blatch; on the corresponding I4 of section 36, R. Jones. Section 36 was school-land.

We shall now resume our survey from the northern boundary of the township, beginning with sections 2 and 3. On the former section the NEI4 was owned by Mr. O. R. Sweezey, an American. His claim was "jumped" by an adventurer named Jack Beatty. Both names appear on the Marshall map. The E^o of NWI4 belonged to Isaiah Jevons, a native of Staffordshire, but many years a resident of America. The Wf.< was owned by Mr. Lewin, but occupied by Alfred Yarrow. The S^o was divided into four eighties. The EJ2 and WJ2 of SE>4 were owned by Messrs. Shrives and Guy respectively. Both were from the county of Sussex.

Mr. Wm. Guy, to whom the writer is more extensively indebted than to any other informant, was a native of the parish of Ripe, near Hastings. He was born in 1833, the son of John and Elizabeth ( Feist) Guy. He attended Tunbridge school from 1845 to 1847, was afterwards in Hastings, and then at Tunbridge Wells from March 1, 1850, to February, 1854, when he went to London and united with the Congregational church at Westminster Chapel, of which Rev. Samuel Martin" (died 1878) was pastor. He was in business at Oxford, 1856-'60, and later in Shrewsbury until the time of his coming to America. By residence on the south co^st and later in the Thames

Note 96. — "The 'eighty' now owned by John Young was first settled by a man from Illinois, who built a sod house on the southeast corner. Jason Withers. I think, got it for a tree claim, and then my brother Arthur had it."— (J. P. Marshall.)

Note 97.— National Dictionary of Biog., vol. 36. pp. 294-295.

The Wakefield Colony. 31

and Severn valleys, Mr. Guy acquired an extensive knowledge of a large part oi England. Not only did he become well versed in a great variety of matters pertaining to London, but he was likewise well acquainted with the university town of Oxford, and with Shrewsbury, '■"* the old capital of the Welsh border.

In the early days of the English "settlement in Clay county Mr. Guy ran the ferry-boat which connected Wakefield with the townships east of the river. This afforded him unusual opportunity for becoming acquainted with the settlers. His extensive knowledge of places in England gave him a grasp of facts as well as a memory for persons not often equaled. It would be no exaggeration to say that he knew every one in and about Wakefield. To his personal recollections we owe the larger part of our definite infoi'mation concerning the English settlers.

A few words may be added about his connection with the subsequent history of the town. He has been a deacon in the Madura Congregational church for about eighteen years. To this office he brought a wide knowledge of the Scriptures and an acquaintance with representative evangelical preaching such as few possess. In civil life he has been a member of the town council for five years, and was likewise mayor of Wakefield in 1889-'90.'J''

The following changes in the ownership of the SWI4 of sec. 2 took place before the Marshall map was drawn:

