The Wio was first occupied by Humphrey Hughes, afterwards by a Mr. Phillips. The E^o of the quarter-section was taken up by John Cole, who came out on the Nebraska. It afterwards passed into the hands of Walter Parsons, whose sister married Mr. Phillips, the proprietor of the adjoining "eighty. "'00 Both farms were eventually purchased by B. F. Jevons, son of Isaiah Jevons.

The Nio of sec. 3 was owned by Mr. Charles Ingram, a native of county Dorset, England. St. John's church. Episcopal, was built on the northeast corner of his estate. Mr. Ingram was a member of the executive committee of the Wakefield Agricultural and Literary Society (see section IV). He sustained serious injuries in trying to rescue some haystacks from a prairie fire, and shortly afterwards returned to England and died there. Three "eighties" on the N^o of sec. 10 were owned by members of the Titcomb family (Mrs. Titcomb and two sons, Mark and Edwin). They were from London. The EU of NE>2i belonged to John Bulmer. James Vincent homesteaded the S'^ of SEf4 of sec. 10. 'o' When the Marshall map was made the aforesaid quarter-section belonged to Thos. Holt and Richard Cawcutt. They were younger men, who, I am informed, came out in the same party with Mr. Vincent. Somewhat later the Holt farm became the property of Geo. Pearson. Both claims were afterwards purchased by J. K. Hammond.

On section 10, the NWI4 was occupied by Gilbert Jones, son of a chemist in Sloane street, Chelsea. The claim was railroad land and seems later to have reverted to the railroad company. Gilbert Jones went back to England, probably about 1874. i»2

Note 98. — "Shrewsbury was the chief place of an extensive and fertile district. The court of the marches of Wales was held there. In the language of the gentry many miles around the Wrekin, to go to Shrewsbury was to go to town."— (Macaulay, Hist, of Eng. ch. Ill, ' England in

Note 99.— W. Guy, personal reminiscences. April 3, 1908.

Note 100.— W. Guy. personal reminiscences. Note 101.— J. G. Billingham.

Note 102.-W. Guy.

32 The Wakefield Colony.

The W^.j of NWi4 of section 14 was owned by Mr. John Muston, the E^.^ of the same quarter by Edward Moore. The latter was associate pastor of the Madura Union church in the early days. They came over on the Nebraska in 1869. The Moore farm was afterwards purchased by Thomas Waller, who came from the Lancashire border, not far from Staleybridge.'"^ The proprietor of the Ei^ of NEI4 of section 14 was James Marshall, a brother of J. P. Marshall. He married Miss Downey, a sister of Mrs. Alex. Maitland. He subsequently lived in St. Louis for about two years and then returned to London, England. The WKt of the same quarter-section was the homestead of Mr. J. P. Marshall. In a letter of recent date he says: "My homestead was the W^o of NEI4 of section 14, twp. 10, range 3, and my brother James had the E^b of the same quarter. He also bought the Wio of NWI4 of section 13. When he left I bought both pieces from him."i»^

Mr. Poppleton and his sons owned claims on the S^o of the section. The W}t of SWI4 belonged to Edward Jones, who came out with the Alsop party in 1870. Mr. Jones afterwards purchased the Batchelor farm on section 6, in Repubhcan township. By far the largest tract of land in Gill township (section 23 and half of section 15) was owned, nominally at least, by parties named Southworth. It is probable that they were not actual settlers, and that the land eventually reverted to the company. The later proprietors of the Southworth section were C. M. Stone and J. M. McDougal '"^

On section 22 the E^U of NWI4 was owned by Mr. Gillett. He married a Miss Eustace. The SWI4, W^s, was owned by John Pett, who came out in the winter of 1869-'70. The Eio belonged to J. W. Sampson, who was a member of the Alsop party. On the SEI4. the N^^ was owned by Joseph Starling, the S^o by Charles Harris. Mr. Harris was a member of the Oxfordshire colony, and the neatly painted house which he erected on his claim was a landmark in the pioneer days.

The proprietors of the NWI4 of sec. 26 were Messrs. Poppleton and Exley; the NEI4, Messrs. Gaston and Buckle. E. T. Buckle afterwards traded his place in section 26 to James Young for the latter's place in township 9, section 34. On the S^o of the section the E^.s of the SW14 was owned by one of the Oxfordshire settlers named Cumber; the W^o was the property of James Clarke. John Chambers (of county Kent, England) owned the E^o of the SEI4. On section 28 three eighties were owned by Stephen Seal and members of his family, and one (E^oof NEI4) by Thos. Newell. The Seal family were from Northamptonshire originally, but came to this country from Surrey.'""

Two eighties, forming the eastern third of section 21, were owned by Mr. Docking, and the S^o of sec. 4 belonged to members of the Haden family. The NEI4 of the same section was the property of Mr. Moutrie. The W^o belonged to an American settler named Lake. Mrs. Pearson, who came from Baltimore in November, 1870, owned the E^o of SEi4 of sec. 8. The services of the Episcopal church were first held in her house in the spring of 1871. and continued until the Rev. Mr. Hickox assumed charge. Mrs.

Note 103.— W. Guy.

Note 104.— J. P. Marshall (Wakefield. September 30. 1906). Note 105.— Plat-book, sectioa23, township 10, range 3 east. Note 106. -W. Seal.

The Wakefield Colony. 33

Pearson removed to Wakefield in 1881, and resided at tiie corner of B street and Sixth avenue.'"" Definite information concerning other settlers in Gill township has not been procured.

Among the settlers in Union Township were Jasper Cowell, Mrs. Randall, and James Yarrow, all of whom had claims on section 28.""* Benjamin Moutelle owned the farm previously occupied by the Laundys. T. C. Roscoe and S. B. Porter both had claims on section 22.

"Mr. S. B. Porter homesteaded the S^o of SW}^^ of sec. 22, township 9, range 3, now owned by Mr. Sam Adams. Mr. Porter also owned the 160 acres south of his homestead. Some years later he sold out and went to Oregon." '"'

The homestead of Mr. Wm. Alsop, well known as a leading member of the party from the Welsh border, was on the Sf ^ of NE^^ of sec. 24, in the same township."" A party of young men— L. J. Millard, J. Barron and John Shute— lived for some time on the Boutwell place, north of Wakefield.

Concerning Mr. R. Hamilton, of Athelstane township (N^-i of NEI4 of sec. 26), the Platbook makes the following statement: "One of the foremost men in this township w^as R. Hamilton, who formerly Hved in Athelstane Ford, in Scotland. When the post-oflftce was established at his house he named it Athelstane; and when the township was formed it took its name from the post-office.... The post-office was established in 1873. " '"

The settlement at Timber creek, 'iwith its cemetery looking down on Wakefield from the highest point east of the river, is but little older than the English colony in years, and yet, so far as our national history is concerned, it belongs to a much older order of things. Its origin, like that of other pioneer beginnings in Kansas, must be traced to that mighty movement which peopled the valley of the Ohio and from thence flowed out into all the lands of the middle West. Nor should we forget that the struggle between competing systems north and south of Mason and Dixon's line brought free-state men to the creek vClleys of Clay county, just as it brought John Brown to Osawatomie. It was the triumph of the free-state cause in Kansas that precipitated the issues of three-quarters of a century of conflict, dating it, as I think we may, from the ordinance of 1787. Yet Wakefield is not without an historical interest of its own. American history has its sources in the local rather than in the general history of Great Britain. Hence the register of the settlers has to do with places and movements that belong quite as much to the background of American history as to the local history of England. To consider the various districts of old England in their mutual relations, we must think of the country as divided by a diagonal fine extending from Chester to London. This boundary coincides very nearly with the ancient Roman highway of Watling street"- in early

*"The Beecher Bible and Rifle Company still in the spirit hovers over Kansas like the chariots of fire round about Elisha."— E. H. Abbott, Religious Life in America, p. 213.

Note 107.— J. P. Marshall.

Note 108. -J. G. Cowell (Clay Center, January 25, 1908).

Note 109. -R. Alsop. Note 110.— W. Guy. Note 111.— Plat-book. p. 21.

Note 112.— I venture to include this brief digression on what may be termed the historic significance of the Wakefield Colony.— (W. J. C. )

Note 113.— The actual course of Watling street runs from Wroxeter, near Shrewsbury, to Dunstable, and thence to London, but since Essex is a Saxon land a line must be drawn eastward from Dunstable to the sea.

34 The Wakefield Colony.

times between the Angles and Saxons and at a later period between the Saxons and the Danes.

The eastern half of middle England, lying beyond Watling street, is the native home of the literary language of the English-speaking world."* Originally the local dialect of Northamptonshire and southern Lincolnshire, it is now the common tongue of Britain, and, one almost might venture to say, the universal language of the younger nations of the earth. The town of Northampton, from its central position, became one of the meeting-places of the northern and southern English. Parliaments were on several occasions held here, notably that of 1328, which acknowledged the independence of Scotland. Here, too, was the ancestral home of the Washingtons. Lawrence Washington was twice mayor of Northampton in the reign of Henry VIII, and his descendants resided at Sulgrave manor till the time of Cromwell. Having lost their lands during the Puritan revolution, they subsequently occupied the humble cottage at Little Brington (six miles from Northampton) which still attracts the attention of the American pilgrim."''

South of the Thames we find the land of the West Saxons, with its old capital at Winchester. This district, differing widely in speech from middle England, was the immediate dominion of the line of kings to which Alfred the Great belonged. The influence of the Thames valley, and more especially of London, tended from the first to draw the main body of Saxon territory into the general life of England. The West Saxon speech held its ground as a literary language from the days of King Alfred (died 901) till John of Trevisa, in 1387, and is still represented by the rustic dialects of Somerset and the adjoining counties.

In the southwest, local feeling was much in evidence during the wars of the Puritan revolution. Puritanism, instead of being generally diffused through the country, was almost characteristic of the larger towns. This was not without its influence upon the course of events in the great civil war. Places like Plymouth and Taunton, defended by their own citizens, seemed like puritan communities in the midst of a country not fully alive to the issue."" Forty years later the same union of local feeling and puritan sentiment reappears in the ill-starred rebellion of the duke of Monmouth. Those of his adherents who were transported were consigned to the West Indies, because in New England or New Jersey they would be sure to find sympathizers. With but little change in scene and circumstance, the part

Note 114. — "The East Midland (dialect) became the language of literature, the standard English. Becoming 'in cloisters on the Nen and Welland the fullest receiver of French words, and the largest accepter of the changes, and especially in Robert of Brunne's work, it took hold of Cambridge, and then of Oxford, and spoken and written in these centers of learning, crept down conquering to the south, and finally seized on London'.' "— (Stopford Brooke )

Note 115.— W. D. Howells, Certain Delightful English Towns, c. XIII. " Northampton and the Washington Country."

Note 116. — "The Restoration had produced no effect on the temper of the Taunton men. They had still continued to celebrate the happy day on which the siege laid to their town by the royal army had been raised; and their stubborn attachment to the old cause had excited so much fear and resentment at Whitehall that by a royal proclamation their moat had been filled up and their wall demolished to its foundation." ( Macaulay, History of England, c. V, p. 542.) In speaking of Taunton as a walled town. Macaulay seems to have been misled by the terms of the royal proclamation. Its resistance becomes the more remarkable when we learn that the defences actually consisted of nothing more than earthworks (with palisades) and the loopholed walls of the houses. (See Gardiner, History of the Great Civil War. vol. II. p. 98.) "When Blake de" fended Taunton, he was not merely defending a strong military post which military needs required should be defended; he was something like the defender of a free city; he was the defender of a town which had a character and an interest of its own; he was the leader of burghers who knew for what they were fighting and whose hearts were thoroughly in the cause." — ( Freeman, English Towns and Districts, p. 117.)

The Wakefield Colony. 35

which the Southwest played in those conflicts might seem almost like a chapter from the beginnings of New England. This is not without significance, both for the English settlers from that region and for those American families that claim a west country origin. •'"

The intermediate district, lying for the most part north of the Thames, consists of two border lands, the forgotten boundary between the Angles and the Saxons, and the long-contested frontier between the Saxons and the Welsh. London, "a nation of six millions that chooses to call itself a town," is situated near the southeast corner of this part of England. Oxford holds a central position not unlike that of Northampton in the East Midlands. On the western line Shrewsbury must be accorded a similar importance. A large party of colonists came to Wakefield from the Thames valley, and another, from the Welsh border.

The country north of the Humber links the history of England to that of Scotland, to the Dano-Norwegian kingdom of Dublin, and to the lands of the Scandinavian north— a subject too large to receive even the briefest treatment here. More immediate interest attaches tothe fact that Wakefield bears the name of a Yorkshire town, the former home of one of its founders. Another point of contact is afforded by the " Geneva version " of the Bible, 118 a copy of which is owned by W. E. Lumb, one of our settlers from the north country. This version was translated by the English exiles who fled to Geneva in the days of Queen Mary. William Whittingham,"» the principal translator, born at Chester about the year 1524, was, both on his father's and his mother's side, of Lancashire descent. At Geneva he succeeded John Knox, the celebrated Scottish reformer, as pastor of the English church, and after his return to England he became Dean of Durham. The Geneva version was the popular Bible of the seventeenth century. Its adoption of the verse divisions made it useful for reference. Its smaller size gave it immense advantage over editions that were printed exclusively in folio, and at the same time the " helps '*'with which it was furnished put the reader in possession of the results of the best biblical scholarship of that day. The Geneva version was, as the citations in the Bradford History show, the Bible of the Pilgrim Fathers. In the political tendency of its annotations we trace at least one of the sources of the principle that "governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed."

VII. -CONCLUSION.

Our survey of the early history of the Wakefield colony closes with the year 1874. In that year Kansas was devastated by grasshoppers, and the settlers felt, not without reason, that the cup of their misfortunes was full. We shall give an account of the fate of the -colony in general, together with brief notices of the subsequent fortunes of the settlers.

Note 117.— Genealogical and Historical Record of the Descendants of Wm. Locke, of Woburn, pp. 342-346; the Dedham Branch of the Avery Family in America, p. 12.

Note 118.— We give the title-page of Mr. Lumb's Bible:— "The Bible: Translated according to the Ebrew and Greeke. and conferred with the best translations in diverse Languages. With most profitable Annotations upon all the hard places, and other things of great importance as may appeare in the Epistle to the Reader. And also a most profitable Concordance for the readie finding out of anything in the same conteined. JOSHUA 1: 8. Let not this Booke of the Lawe depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night that thou mayest observe and doe according to all that is vsrritten therein; for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then shalt thou have good successe. Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker Printers to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. 1599. Cumyratiaetprivilegio Reginx Maiestatis."

Note 119. — National Dictionary of Biog., " Whittingham." vol. LXI. pp. 150-153.

36 The Wakefield Colony.

The two chief drawbacks with which the colonists had to contend were the dry continental climate, so different from that of England, and the adverse economic conditions. In addition to these there were also the many hardships incident to pioneer life.

The change from an insular to a continental climate has often proved one of the severest tests, not only of colonial enterprise but also of military endurance. One need scarcely mention the sufferings of the British soldiers during the Crimean war (winter of 1854-'55). Life in the heart of a continent has always been full of surprises to those who were born and brought up on islands or projecting coast lands. Herodotus, who visited the shores of the Black sea in the fifth century, B. c, has thus described his impressions of the climate of southern Russia:

"All this country which I have been speaking of is subject to such a severe winter that for eight months the frost is so intolerable that if you pour water on the ground you will not make mud, but if you light a fire you will make mud." '-"

This is perhaps the earliest description of a continental climate that has come down to us. Even the tone of exaggeration is not without interest, since it shows how strongly the contrast was felt. We should not, however, forget that continental visitors, from the ancient Roman historians to the American naturalist, John Burroughs, have rendered a similarly unfavorable judgment upon the insular climate of Britain. '2' Historical interest, in this particular, attaches to the story of Wakefield because it links the experience of our own times to that of the first colonists in Virginia and New England. Difference of climate was one of the most serious drawbacks with which the path-breakers of colonization had to contend. A striking illustration of this fact is afforded by the story of the Popham colony in 1607. ^'^-

"The cause of the failure of many early colonies is now evident. The old voyagers were ignorant of the great difference in the climates of Europe and America; they expected to find similar conditions on both sides of the Atlantic. They were further led into error through the fact that their explorations were made in the summer, when the climatic conditions of the two sides of the North Atlantic most nearly resemble one another. For instance, [George] Weymouth, who visited Maine in the summer, found a temperature which resembled that of southern France, but the colonists who came over in consequence of his favorable reports found a winter temperature like that of northern Norway." '-^

Note 120.— Herodotus, book IV. sec. 28: The "Scythia " of Herodotus includes the modem provinces of South Russia and Little Russia.

Note 121. — "Coelum." says Tactitus, " crebris iynhrihus nc nehulis foedum; asperitas frigorum abest. The sky is deformed by clouds and frequent rains; but the cold is never extremely rigorous." ( Vit. Agr. c. 12.) "There is one thing they do not have in England that we can boast of at home, and that is a good masculine type of weather; it is not even feminine; it is childish and puerile, though I am told that oci-asionally there is a full-grown storm. But I saw nothing but petulant little showers and prolonged juvenile sulks. The clouds have no reserve, no dignity; if there is a drop of water in them ( and there are generally several drops out it comes. The prettiest little showers march across the country in summer, scarcely bigger) than a streetwatering cart; sometimes by getting over the fence one can avoid them, but they keep the haymakers in a perpetual flurry. There is no cloud scenery, as with us; no mass and solidity, no height nor depth. The clouds seem low, vague and vapory — immature, indefinite, inconsequent tial, like youth." — (John Burroughs, Fresh Fields, pp. 106, 107.)

Note 122.— It was believed, on the testimony of those who had spent the previous summer in New England, that the country would produce nutmegs (not the wooden variety ), and other tropical spices. "On May 31, 1607. a fleet under Geo. Popham, brother of the chief justice, and Raleigh Gilbert, sailed for the coast of what is now the state of Maine. They landed at the mouth of the Kennebec, built a fort, and explored the country. They found no gold; the natives proved hostile; and the winter was severe beyond anything they had ever conceived. They seized the first opportunity to abandon the enterprise, and returned home in the following spring." — (Channing, Student's History, pp. 52, 53.)

Note 123.— Channing, Student's History, pp. 52, 53.

The Wakefield Colony. 37

One hesitates to draw too close a parallel between the Wakefield colony and the first settlements on the Atlantic coast. Yet it will be remembered that Rev. Richard Wake visited Kansas in a year when conditions most nearly resembled those with which he was familiar in Illinois.'-^ On every hand there was the evidence of an abundant rainfall, and the grass, even on the high prairie, was exceedingly luxuriant. In the presence of such facts there was no occasion to suspect the possible differences of climate that might come with an additional elevation of six or eight hundred feet, and a position considerably nearer the Rocky Mountain plateau.

The glowing accounts issued by immigration companies and the sharp practice often connected with real-estate deals were among the grievances of the colonists. The following incident is vouched for by a family well known among the English settlers: On landing in New York they were met by the local agent of the National Land Company, who endeavored to drive a bargain with them for property in the West. Failing to effect the transaction he gave them a sealed letter to the company's agent at Chicago. En route one of the members of the family said to the head of the house: "Father, I wouldn't carry a letter from one unknown person to another with whom you are no better acquainted; why don't you find out what is in the letter? " The suggestion was acted upon, and the contents of the letter were found to be as follows:

"Dear N: S and family think of going to Kansas. Fix them,

and remember me. Yours, etc., ( )"ia5

The greatest drawback to the colony was found in the general economic conditions. The country had not recovered from the civil war. Money was scarce and commodities of all kinds expensive. Means of communication were very inadequate, and the markets of St. Louis and Chicago were only on the threshold of their development. There was no local demand for agricultural products and the Kansas Citytnarket was easily glutted. The lavish expenditures of English capital in Clay, Geary (Davis) and Dickinson counties had no effect on the country at large. My father once said that during 1869-'70 a quarter of a million of English money was spent in the district just mentioned, where one could n't have collected a million cents three years later. This estimate is confirmed by others.'-"

In 1874-'75 Kansas was devastated by grasshoppers— a species of insect much resembling the migratory locust of the Orient. "This visitation of grasshoppers or locusts was the most serious in the history of the state. They reached from the Platte river (Nebraska) on the north to northern Texas on the south, and penetrated as far east as Sedalia, Mo. Their eggs were deposited in favorable localities in this vast territory. The young hatched the next spring did great damage to early crops, but in June, having passed into the wing state, they rose into the air and flew back to the northwest, whence the parent swarms had come the year before."'-'

In Ebbutt's Life in Kansas there is an account of the devastation wroyght in Morris county. This was about a fortnight, or possibly three weeks, after their appearance in the Republican valley. In the Wakefield neigh-

NOTE 124.— Wakefield Advertiser, November 8, 1894.

Note 125.— W. Seal. Note 126.— J. P. Marshall.

Note 127. — See Wilder's Annals of Kansas, August 7, 1874.

38 The Wakefield Colony.

borhood they consumed the unharvested crops, garden vegetables and the fruit and foliage of the trees. My father, together with Messrs. Billingham and Pettigrew, worked far into the night cutting their corn (t. e., maize), it having been discovered that the insects would not touch dry fodder while green foliage was available. We had a small peach orchard just beginning to bear fruit. The grasshoppers stripped it bare, even gnawing the tender bark from the shoots, so that here and there a naked peach-stone stood alone on its dry stem. In the following spring (1875) their destructive work began as early as May, and in Wilder's Annals of Kansas it is recorded that Topeka was swarming with grasshoppers from June 7th to 16th of that year. It was, however, after the grasshopper year that matters were seen in their severest guise. About that time my father described conditions as they then were through the columns of one of the West of England papers:

■ "Five years is certainly long enough to give a thing a trial.... When I tell you that scores of persons who went out west with capital and every advantage would be glad enough to occupy a laborer's cottage and eat a laborer's food in England, you will know that they have been grievously disappointed. It is quite true that land is very cheap and that meat can be had at almost a nominal price.... When lecturers talk about the cheapness of things it would be well if they would also tell the cost of raising the crop mentioned and the average price paid to the producer. I see by one of the letters, copies of which were circulated by the lecturers, that beef can be bought at l^d. per ITj. Where, then, can be the farmer's profit for raising cattle, and feeding them through the fearful winters, if they are afterwards disposed of at such prices ? A good bullock should weigh 100 tTjs. per quarter, or a total of 400 n)s., which, at the price named, would amount to 21. 10s. for the whole animal. If these things were considered over, it would be seen just where the shoe pinches; and that many years of toil, hardship and disappointment must be endured before the prospects presented can be realized. No one looking on can tell half of the real facts, and those who have gone through it all find words fail to express their full meaning."'28

Disappointment was not peculiar to the English colonists. An American settler, writing to the Courier Journal, of Louisville, Ky., says: "This state is a fraud on a grand scale." His remarks apply both to the conditions then existing in Kansas and to the methods employed by colonizing agencies. His description is decidedly pessimistic: "The people are destitute and there is no money. The women are half-clothed and the men are barefooted on the streets." '^^

The misfortunes of the sister colony at Victoria were much greater than those of Wakefield. Mr. Grant died in the early days of the settlement, and with his decease the moving spirit of the enterprise was gone. "Misfortune fbllowed misfortune. Thousands of stock died. The colonists were discouraged and moved away, abandoning their homes and lands. Their places were filled by a large party from southern Russia."

Mr. R. T. Batchelor, who visited Victoria in the winter of 1897-'98, gives the following account of the church erected by the founder of the Victoria colony:

"Our first visit was to the beautiful little church erected by Mr. Grant, at his own expense, in the year 1876, and which was not completed when he died. The first time it was used was for his funeral service. A handsome marble tablet inside the building and over the entrance commemorates his

Note 128.— J. Chapman.

Note 129.- A. W. Grisman. about 1879. J. P. Marshall.

The Wakefield Colony. 39

death, i^o He was buried just west of the church and his grave is surrounded by a neat fence which has been kept up and cared for by a few of his old friends who still cherish his memory. The church was practically abandoned for many years, as those who were interested were few and too much discouraged to keep up and maintain the services. Lightning struck the building and did much damage. The Russian children made the church a playground. The fine organ was damaged by wet and ill-use. The stained-glass windows were broken and desolation prevailed." '^^

This state of desolation was not, however, suffered to continue permanently and, as Mr. Batchelor tells us: "To-day the church appears as one of the most beautiful Episcopal churches for its size in the diocese,"

A few words may be added concerning the subsequent fortunes of some of the settlers mentioned in the earlier sections of this narrative.

Rev. Richard Wake resided for some time in Topeka. He afterwards removed to Salt Lake City, where he took active part in the state temperance movement. Mr. Alexander Maitland went to Seattle, in the state of Washington. E. M. Fulcher, who afterwards owned the Maitland farm on section 12, Gill township, went to South Africa, but later returned to this country and settled in San Francisco. Mr. T. P. Pettigrew, well known as the secretary of the Wakefield Agricultural and Literary Society, removed to Virginia and resided at or near Richmond. Rev. W. S. Crouch, in the early days proprietor of a timber claim on section 30, in Republican township, has been for a number of years pastor of the Congregational church at Maplehill, Kan. William AUaway, at one time proprietor of the James Gibbon farm, removed to Clay Center. John Brett also went to Clay Center, He died there, and his widow married a Mr. Bradbury, i^- John Farrington Alsop, son of Wm. Alsop, of Caine's creek, left Wakefield for Denver, Colo. He was never heard of again. Fehx James Fitters, better known at Wakefield as Jim Fitters, enlisted in the United States army, and fell with General Custer at the battle of Little Big Horn, June 25, 1876. i^'^ Through the courtesy of Geo. W. Martin, secretary'of the Kansas State Historical Society, we are enabled to insert the following military record:

"WarDept. 1199863. "The Military Secretary's Office,

Washington, March 19, 1906.

"Respectfully returned to Mr. Geo. W. Martin, secretary of the Kansas State Historical Society, Topeka, Kan.

"It is shown by the records that one Felix James Fitter (not found as James Fitters), private, -troop I, Seventh cavalry, was enlisted September 4, at St. Louis Barracks, Mo., and' that he was killed June 25, 1876, m the battle of the Little Big Horn river, Montana territory.,, t^,

" It is stated in the records that this soldier was born m Alresford, England F. C, AiNSWORTH, Military Secretary." "(M. S. 0. 72-L)"

The Cator brothers, likewise members of the Wakefield colony, settled in Texas. Robert Cator subsequently removed to the Pacific slope. His brother, James H. Cator, is now a prosperous cattleman at Zulu, Tex.'^^

Many of those who left Wakefield in the early days went back to England. Among the number of ex-colonists were the following: Rev. Joseph Binns, who came out on the steamer Nebraska in 1869, afterwards returned

Note 130. - April 26. 1878, George Grant died at Victoria, near Hays City, aged 64.- (Wilder's Annals of Kansas.)

Note 131.— Wakefield Advertiser. January 21. 1898.

Note 132.-R. O. Mackintosh. Note 133.— J. P. Marshall. Note 134.-H. W. C. Budden.

40 The Wakefield Colony.

to England and became a presiding elder in the Midlands. '^s John Deere, who came out on the same ship, went back to Great Britain, and became proprietor of an ironmonger's business (hardware store) near the Elephant and Castle ( London). '■'° During his subsequent visit in England my father on one occasion met Mr. Deere on the platform of the railway station at Oxford. Mr. Laundy, the first proprietor of the Moutelle farm (N^o of NEI4 of section 34, in Union township), was also one of those who returned to England. !•■'" Another ex-colonist was James Marshall, brother of Mr. J. P. Marshall (see section VI).

We have already noticed that Mr. Charles Ingram, one of the members of the executive committee of the Agricultural and Literary Society, also returned to England. His property in Gill township, section 3, was afterwards purchased by Mr. F. W. Cornell. Gilbert Jones, whose claim was the NWI4 of sec. 11, in the same township, also returned to England, probably about the year 1874. "s His land seems to have reverted to the company. Uriah Handley (from Cambridgeshire), whose claim was the SWI4 of sec. 27, in Exeter township, afterwards resided near Bath, England, and engaged in the mining and manufacture of fuller's earth, i-'' Another of the ex-colonists who went back to Great Britain was Mr. L. J. Millard ( claim SWI4 of sec. 13, Athelstane township).'^" Some years later my father, during his stay in England, met Mr. Millard at Chippenham, in North Wiltshire. 11

•Among the members of the Oxfordshire colony who returned to their native land were Messrs. Gillett (E^e of NWI4 of sec. 22, Gill township), Charles Harris (S>^of SEI4), Cumber (Ei^of SWI4 of sec. 26), the Clinch brothers, and Mr. and Mrs. Jardine. Mr. Jardine was a son-in-law of Mr. James Eustace, and came out in the steamship City of Washington, in April, 1870. He was afterwards connected with the firm of Huntley & Palmer, 1^'- biscuit manufacturers at Reading. Mr. Thomas Beldham informs me, on the authority of Frank Harris, who visited his old home some five years ago, that the Clinch brothers have prospered since their return to the mother country, and that Duncan Church is now a well-to-do veterinary surgeon in London. The Buckle family remained at Wakefield for nearly twenty years, and then removed to Alberta, British America.

The story of the Wakefield colony is but a minor circumstance in the spread of the English-speaking race throughout the world. It has, however, for those who took part in it, the same interest -which a private soldier's recollections have for the battles in which he fought. As we have seen, the experiences of the English colonists of 1869-'70 often remind us of like circumstances in the history of the first settlements in Virginia and New England. The reason for this must be viewed from the standpoint of a larger historic outlook. Unlike the American settlers they had no welldefined idea of pioneer life. They did not realize the greatness of the task that was before them. To the Americans, on the other hand, the "Great West" had always been a field for enterprise. The struggle with the wilderness was something with which they and their fathers were equally

Note 135.— W. Guy. Note 139. -R. O. Mackintosh.

Note 136.— W. Guy. Note 140.— Plat-book. Athelstane township.

Note 137.— W^. Guy. Note 141.— J. Chapman.

Note 138.— W. Guy. Note 142.— J. Chapman.

The Wakefield Colony. 41

familiar.'^'' In this way the colonial life, its hardships and its achievements, had become a part of the national consciousness. No similar influence, however, has determined the inner developments of modern England. In this connection I cannot forbear quoting a passage from Prof. J. R. Seeley, which, although it refers in the first instance to the newer lands of the British empire, may be applied, in all its characteristic features, to the settlements of Englishmen in the United States:

"People cannot change their abodes, pass from an island to a continent, from the fiftieth degree of north latitude to the tropics or the southern hemisphere, from an ancient community to a new colony, from vast manufacturing cities to sugar plantations or to lonely sheepwalks where aboriginal savage tribes still wander, without changing their ideas and habits and ways of thinking— nay, without somewhat modifying in the course of a few generations their physical type. We know already that the Canadian and the Victorian are not quite like the Englishman; do we suppose then that in the next century, if the colonial population has become as numerous as that of the mother country, assuming that the connection has been maintained and has become closer, England itself will not be very much modified and transformed?"'"

The interest which the story of Wakefield possesses is not merely local in character. It is an illustration, at first hand, of the movements and changes that are going on everywhere in the English-speaking world.

APPENDIX I. —Notes on the History of Wakefield.

REV. WM. TODD AND THE MADURA MISSION.

Madura, India, was from very early times one of the chief seats of Hindoo paganism. Rev. Wm. Todd began work there as a missionary of the American board in July, 1834, being associated with Rev. Henry R. Hoisington. The mission celebrated its jubilee in 1884, when a small volume was published, giving the history' of the mission. There are now three native protestant churches in the city— Madura station. West Gate, Madura, and East Madura. The statistics given in 1884 for the entire district were: "Stations, 11; churches, 35; communicants. 2817." In 1901 the mission reckoned 4911 church members and 17,276 adherents.

Mention of Mr. Todd's missionary career may be found in Brown's Propagation of Christianity, vol. 3, p. 11 (Edinburgh and London, 1854); in Anderson's History of the Missions of the American Board in India (Boston. 1874), map. pp. 194, 195, Todd, Rev. Wm., 171, 175, 196. Later records of the mission: American Madura Mission, Jubilee volume, 1834-1884 ( S. P. C. K. Press, Madras, 1886), account of Mr. Todd, p. 52; In the Madura Country, Sixty-sixth Annual Report of the American Madura Mission, 1900, ed. W. M. Zumbro.

The city of Madura dates from about 500 B. c. From that period until 1064 A. D. it was the seat of the Pandian kings. Megasthenes, about 300

Note 143.— During the first half of the nineteenth century the colonization of the West was the really creative factor of American history. "The votes of the states west of the mountains elected Jefferson in 1800 and Madison in 1812, and gave Jackson his preponderance over Adams in 1824. The West was at this time what the colonists had been half a century earlier— a thriving, bustling, eager community, with a keen sense of trade and little education." In 1828 "Jackson swept every Southern and Western state and received six hundred and fifty thousand popular votes, against five hundred thousand for Adams."— (Hart, The Formation of the Union, pp. 261,

Note 144.— The Expansion of England, p. 13.

42 The Wakefield Colony.

B. c, makes mention of the city, and one of its kings sent an embassy to Augustus Cassar. "' After having been conquered by the Mohammedans under Malik Kafur, 1310 A. D., the native kingdom was restored in 1559 by Vivanatha. The greatest of his descendants, Tirumala Nayakka (1623-'59), restored and beautified the great temple and built a magnificent palace. The kingdom came under British control in 1758 and was annexed in 1801.

The Madura district is a veritable stronghold of Hinduism. From time immemorial Madura has been the religious capital of the southern extremity of India. Here is the temple of the great goddess Meenatchi, the presiding deity of the city. "This temple covers 14J acres, and is in size the third, and in magnificence and upkeep the first temple in all India, and has hardly its equal anywhere among the ethnic religions. A part of the temple is given up to the worship of Siva, who, under the name of Sockalingam, is the consort of Meenatchi. Meenatchi was originally an ancient queen of the Madura country, and on her death became the presiding demoness of of the devil-worship of the district. Later, when the Brahmans came to southern India, the new cult absorbed the old by marrying Meenatchi to Siva and giving her a place in the Hindu pantheon. " ^^^

NOTES ON THE PIONEERS OF THE REPUBLICAN VALLEY.

John P. King died at his home east of Wakefield, May 22, 1906, aged seventytwo years. He was born in Somerset county, Pennsylvania, December 24, 1833, where he lived until early manhood. In 1854 he removed to Illinois. "The next spring he came to Pottawatomie county, Kansas, and after

spending the summer there he came to Clay county where he

has resided ever since. At first he lived in a little house south of Chet Flemming's home, but soon moved to the farm where he spent his life.... About forty years ago Mr. King united with the Methodist Episcopal church, of which he remained a faithful and earnest member.... On the 5th of January, 1859, he was united in marriage to Miss Mary Bowers. To this union three children were born. His companion, one daughter— Mrs. John Male — a foster-daughter and grandchildren remain to mourn his loss. The funeral services were conducted by Reverend Lacey at the Timber Creek schoolhouse, on Wednesday afternoon, where a large concourse of relatives, friends and lifelong neighbors gathered to pay their last respects to the honored dead, after which the remains were interred in the Timber Creek cemetery. The bereaved ones have the sympathy of all."

"Jeremiah Younkin, a former resident of Clay county, an early settler here, died Monday, February 25, at his home on Timber creek, with a complication of diseases incident to old age. The deceased was seventy-nine years old, and the funeral occurred on Wednesday at eleven o'clock A. M., and the remains were laid to rest in the Milford cemetery. The deceased leaves a wife, two sons and three daughters, and one sister, Mrs. D. H. Myers of this city. The deepest sympathy of a host of friends of the afflicted family is extended to them in their sad hour of bereavement. " — (Clay Center Times, March 7, 1907.)

Note 145.— Strabo, book XV, c. 1. 4 (p. 74) and 73 (pp. 118, 119): "Roman copper coins of the smallest value have been found in such numbers at Madura as to sug-gest that a Roman colony was settled at that place. They come down to the time of Arcadius and Honorius (400 A. D.)." — (V. A. Smith, Early History of India, p. 337.)

Note 14i;. — Dr. J. P. Jones, in Sixty-sixth Ann. Rept. of the Madura Mission, pp. 88, 89.

The Wakefield Colony. 43

Somerset county, Pennsylvania,'^' the old home of our Timber creek pioneers, seems to have been colonized soon after the opening of the highways '^« connecting Pittsburg with Philadelphia. "It is probable that, not long after these roads were opened, traders and pioneers found theirway to this county, and made settlement; but their names and adventures, if any, have not been recorded." Somerset, the county-seat, originally called Brunerstown, was laid out in 1795 and incorporated as a borough in 1804. A lithographed view of the town, as it must have appeared in the first half of the nineteenth century, is given in Rupp's History and Topography (p. 565). The first wave of population appears to have been Scotch-Irish, but by 1830 the German element had come to predominate. Eighty years before, at the time of the organization of Cumberland county (of which Somerset county formed a part), Scotch-Irish names greatly exceeded the German. "When the county (Cumberland) was erected, in 1750, it contained 807 taxable inhabitants, and was represented in the assembly by Joseph Armstrong and Hermannus Alrichs. Robert McCoy, Benjamin Chambers, David McGaw, James Mclntire and John McCormick were the commissioners to select a site for a courthouse."'"

Orleans county, Vermont, '^o was the old home of the Avery family, of Caine's creek. Lying as it does on the Canadian border, it was settled at a comparatively late date, and long retained the character of a pioneer community. The town of Lowell was organized under the name of Kellyvale, then in Chittenden county, March 5, 1787. In the town of Troy the first settler was Capt. Moses Elkins, brother of Josiah Elkins, of Peacham, "a noted hunter and Indian trader," who moved thither in the summer of 1797. Many settlers left during the War of 1812, and even as late as 1837 the remembrance of border warfare was revived by the Canadian insurrection.

THE RICHES. OF OVER STOWEY.

Our attention has already been drawn to the fact that the genealogies both of the Locke and the Avery families claim for them a west country origin. '51 Partly, therefore, for its local associations, and partly because it it serves to illustrate the divergence of American from British nationality, I venture to include a brief account of the Rich family.

This surname first appears in the person of Edmund Rich (died 1240), better known in church history as St. Edmund of Abingdon. Whether as townsmen or yeomen, its bearers seemed to have belonged to the substantial middle class. For several centuries a family of this name was settled at Stowey, in the Quantocks, and by local tradition they are said to have been lords of the manor in that neighborhood. The surname Rich's Holford '"

Note 147.-Hist. Coll. of State of Pennsylvania, Phila.. 1848 (Geo. W. Gorton). Somerset Co.,

Note 148.— Washington's road in 1754; Bouquet's road in 1758.

Note 149.— Cumberland county was separated from Lancaster county by the act of January 27, 1750; Bedford from Cumberland. March 9, 1771; Somerset from Bedford by the act of April 17. 1795.- (Hist. Coll. of Penn., p. 615.)

Note 150.— See Vermont Hist. Magazine, vol. IH (1877), Orleans county, pp. 31-402.

Note 151.— Geneal. and Hist. Record of the Descendants of Wm. Locke, of Woburn, pp. 342346;The Dedham Branch of the Avery Family in America, p. 12.

Note 152. — The addition of such a surname as, for example, in the case of Bovey Tracey, Bishop's Lydeard, etc.. invariably shows the proprietor, or the dignitary, thus indicated to have been lord of the manor.

still attaches to a place on the east slope of the Quantock hills. During the past two centuries the proprietors of 'Cross' were:

Samuel Rich I, and his wife Joan, who are commemorated on the mural tablet in the aisle '^a of the parish church at Over Stowey. They lived in the reigns of William III and Queen Anne, and are mentioned as the grandparents of James Rich, esq., who died April 15, 1815.

Samuel Rich II (died 1765), son of the preceding, and his wife Betty, two sons, and a daughter named Anstice, are buried in the family vault near the porch of the parish church. He was born two years before the legislative union of Scotland, and lived through the momentous half-century which saw the creation of the British empire.

Thomas Rich, esq., (1735-1813), who succeeded his father in 1765, was proprietor of 'Cross' for forty-eight years. A younger contemporary of his was Thomas Poolei^^ (1765-1837), the friend of the poet Coleridge. In 1796 Mr. Poole secured for Coleridge a cottage in the village of Nether Stowey,'" and the poet resided there until he went to Germany in 1798. A curious incident connected with the invasion threatened by Napoleon Bonaparte likewise belongs to the times of Thomas Rich. The ancient hill fort of Dowsborough,!'^ enclosing, it is said, some ten acres, overlooks the twin villages of Stowey. In the long ago it must have been the rallying-point for the tribe that inhabited those parts. When, therefore, the anticipated landing of the French became a matter of daily anxiety, '" it was resolved by the people of the district, to retire to Dowsborough and prepare to resist the invader. All the wagons in the neighborhood were chartered to convey the families of the inhabitants "with their belongings to the ancient hilltop refuge on the first warning of danger." '^s

James Rich, esq., a younger brother of Thomas Rich, proprietor from 1813 to 1815, was the last of the elder branch of the family. At his death the estate was divided among all descendants of his grandfather, i'"'' He gave to the parish church of Over Stowey the massive brass chandelier which hangs in the nave of the church, and it was lighted for the first time at his funeral. By the terms of his will the house and farm at Cross passed to Edmund Rich, of Butcombe, near Bristol. '''^' It is said that James Rich met my maternal great-grandfather by chance at a fair, having previously been unaware of his existence, and that he was so much pleased with the younger

Note 153.— The church consists of the nave and one aisle only.

Note 154.— National Diet, of Biog., vol. XL VI, pp. 104, 105; Mrs. Henry Sanford, Thomas Poole and his Friends. 2 vols.. 1888.

Note 155. — It was during Coleridge's stay in Nether Stowey that the "Rime of the Ancient Mariner" was composed.

Note 156.— The elevation of Dowsborough is about 1100 feet.

Note 157.— Cf. Coleridge's "Fears in Solitude,' which, refers to the threatened invasion of the French in 1796-'98.

Note 158.— Beatrix F. Cresswell, The Quantock Hills, their Combes and Villages, p. 89.

Note 159.— The disappearance of large proprietors who by descent and social position ranked with the gentry, as well as that of the lesser yeoman— freeholders, was one of the changes which distinguished the England of revolutionary times from the England of the earliest colonial period. In the days of Cromwell the English were to a ^reat extent a nation of yeoman freeholders.— ■' From the early years of the eighteenth century this class began to disappear, and by the end of the century it was almost extinct."— (Lecky, History of England, vol. 1, p. 557.)

Note 160. — About this time another member bf the Rich family, Claudius James Rich, of Bristol, was engaged in discovering, or, to speak more precisely, definitely ascertaining, the sites of ancient Nineveh and Babylon.

The Wakefield Colotnj. 45

man that he took him back to Stowey, showed him the house and lands at Cross and asked him how he would like to own that property some day. James Rich, esq., died April 15, 1815; his funeral was held at night in the parish church, and all the heirs, more than a hundred in number, were assembled to hear the reading of his will.

Edmund Rich, who took possession of the house at Cross in 1815, was followed by a son and a grandson, each bearing the name of Samuel. George Lansdowne, esq., afterwards of Hock Pitt, who married a daughter of Edmund Rich, was the first of our relations to come to this country. He traveled through the Northern states, and during his stay in the West was much annoyed by the familiarity of the friendly Indians. They would come into the house unbidden and help themselves to whatever happened to strike their fancy. Traveling facilities were in a backward state, and on one occasion Mr. Lansdowne made the trip from Albany to New York in a cutter. He was accompanied in his travels by the son of a Mr. Keene, of Banwell, in the Mendips.i"! David Keene, a younger brother, I believe, was afterwards rector of St. John's church, Milwaukee, and his "son a classmate of President Roosevelt at Harvard. ^^^

APPENDIX II. -The Marshall Maps.i"

THE FIRST MAP.

The first map is entitled "A Map of Junction City, Kansas, and Adjacent Territory. ' ' It was published by the Davis County Emigration ( sic ) Society, of which S. M. Strickler was president and A. C. Pierce secretary. The reverse side of the map gave a prospectus of the advantages of Junction City and the surrounding district.

The map shows the proposed course of the Republican Valley railroad as originally planned, and also a proposed line to Omaha running north by way of Five Mile creek. Other points of interest are, (1) southeastern Clay county, including the Wakefield neighborhood, (2) the military reservation of Fort Riley, and (3) the hilly country south of the Kansas river, extending from Lyons creek to Humboldt. The last-named district has been identified with the northern boundary of Quivira, invaded by the Spanish conqueror Coronado in 1541. The military reservation of Fort Riley contains the ruins of Pawnee, including the capitol building in which the territorial legislature met on July 2, 1855. The map extends as far west as the section on which St. John's church stands (township 10 south, range 3 east). The creek flowing parallel to the east bank of the Republican appears to be wrongly named. It is unquestionably the stream now known as Timber creek.

THE SECOND MAP.

The second map (p. 23) owes its origin to matters of practical interest. When the settlers came the land was one continuous expanse of rolling prairie

Note 161.— An oak settle, once the property of the elder Mr. Keene, stands by the old-fashioned kitchen fireplace at Hock Pitt.

Note 162.— Most of the items of oral tradition were given me by my cousin, Geo. E. Lansdowne, Esq., J. P. C C. of Over-Stowey; an account of the Rev. David Keene, D. D., written by his son and published in the St. John's Observer, Milwaukee, June, 1897, was furnished by the Rev. James Slidell, the present rector.

Note 163.— To those specified in the text we may add (3) a map of the district southwest of Wakefield, showing its occupants in the early eighties, and (4) a sketch-map of the Golden Ridge school district.

MAP OF JUNCTION CITY AND ADJACENT COUNTRY.

The first Marshall map, 1868.

broken only by the timber that skirted the banks of the larger creeks. There were no fences or boundaries, and no striking peculiarities of surface. A section seemed to owe its very identity to the presence of settlers upon it. In view of this practical difficulty. Mr. J. P. Marshall made an outline chart of the township in which his claim was situated, and from time to time entered the names of those who settled upon it. The map was drawn with pen and ink upon a sheet of ruled note-paper, and measures 25.3 X 15.3 cm., or with the margin 25.5 x 19.8 cm. It is much yellowed with age. Although the map was drawn in 1874, supplementary entries were oc-

ZSS.

ut>H

iva«n^

^eZ'-'/v'

Cewr

ilii

'??j/?Vv

srr

IT^S///?

fl^arrg

T»/ij

rr-ni,

i/BY^-"g

^ix^/rvn

Oha^/7^

i/#/7Cfi

3jB^sn^^

casionally made during the three or four following years. A few explanatory remarks may be added in this connection:

1. The shaded portions of the map represent claims purchased of the Kansas Land and Emigration Company. This excluded homesteads, technically so called, as well as the farms of the earlier American settlers in the Quimby creek valley.

C/orn&ll

//70'f Xtr,

Canycw

Jfeen

f-ord.

Jercns

J^vons

Ti^hiXas

Hurd

S>v& e z

TLU'

Dchtrt^

/ia.^/77a/7ct

Ca,/77/fAaa.s

7oun£

Cair/Ts

Hontadu

/^ee/7s /%tJ"Z5/7

ZJ^t^ /

A/ar&A a.

f>i>/>fttif

Uro

rvn

SCHOOL DISTRICT No. 96. Revised April, 1887.

2. The dotted outline represents the boundary of the Golden Ridge school district.

3. The name (scarcely legible) on the SE>4 of sec. 17, twp. 10, range 4 east, is probably to be read "Purinton. " The earliest entry on the Nio of SW>4 of sec. 10, in Gill township, may possibly be read " Winterbourne. "

4. With regard to section 15 (Gill township) the evidence of the Marshall map has been called in question. The most likely solution is that which has been offered in the sixth section of this history. It is an explanation which must.be accepted in the case of sections 11 and 31 in the same township. Here land was purchased by settlers that afterwards unquestionably reverted to the corporation to which it originally belonged.

The Wakefield Colony. 49

A letter of recent date from Mr. Marshall contains so much interesting matter that I venture to cite it here, although a brief extract has been inserted in the body of the history:

"Wakefield, September 30, 1906.

"My Dear Friend— I fully appreciate your desire to sift out the truth and 'hold fast that which is good. ' Men's memories become somewhat hazy as to matters occurring over one-third of a century ago, and even written records may be in error, as boundaries were little known and less understood during the first few years of settlement.

"Mr. Quimby settled on the quarter-section of the place known as his. The other 240 acres he got from his brother Frank and a man named Robinson, both of whom went as soldiers during the civil war and never returned.

"The '80' now owned by John Young was first settled by a man from Illinois, who built a sod house on the southeast corner. Jason Withers, I think, got it for a tree claim, and then my brother Arthur had it. When he left, i took it, selling it to the Young's shortly after. Jason Withers married Miss Cowdery and lived on the ELj of SWI4 of sec. 12....

"The Buckle on section 26 was E. T. Buckle, who lived there before his marriage to Miss Young, after he traded places with James Young.

"I enclose some slips [maps, pp. 530, 531] covering some of the discussed points, and I think they will agree with my earlier map, except that some of the lines maybe run east and west instead of north and south. In the early days with no roads or fences, it was difficult to tell which way the land lay.

"Hoping that these notes may be of use to you, I am. yours very tru y,

John P. Marshall."

APPENDIX III.— The Chronological Table. In constructing the chronological table on page 53 I have selected chiefly those events that have a merely local character, or else such as connect the history of the Junction City district with the affairs of the state at large.

INDIAN TRAILS.

From very early times the IniJian tribes carried on a primitive sort of commerce by means of trails or track-ways. At least two such trails intersected Kansas diagonally. One appears to have passed up the north side of the Kansas river and then to have crossed the watershed from some point below Ellsworth to the great bend of the Arkansas. Another led from the head waters of the Osage and the Neosho, crossing the trail previously mentioned near Great Bend, and then passing up the Arkansas to the mountains. The trail was continued by way of the Rio de las Animas and the Raton pass to the valley of the Rio Grande del Norte. These routes connected the Mississippi valley with New Mexico, i"-*

harahey and quivira.

In the sixteenth century the country now known as Kansas was included in two regions called Harahey and Quivira. Harahey was the territory of the Pawnee Indians. It embraced western Kansas, but extended far beyond the borders of the state. Quivira lay for the most part between the Kansas and the Arkansas rivers. It was intersected by the trails previously mentioned. When Coronado conquered the settled races of New Mexico, in 1541, the natives lured him into the open plains of the interior, hoping thus to compass his destruction. On the march to Quivira the Span-

Note 164.- Kan. Hist. Coll.. vol. 6. 1889-'96: "Trails in Southern Kansas," by Hon. J. R. Mead, of Wichita, pp. 88-93.

Township 10, Range 3 east.

a) (TLlyffiiAJ-c-^ijtny,

"irtr

'L^iTO-'^^M.

Sestions 13 and 23, railroad land.

"This is the earliest settlement of the tract herein described. The WVi> SW% Sec. 24 is where the Clinches lived— J^. P. Marshall." Adjoining tract on opposite page.

ish invaders crossed the state diagonally and seem to have reached the Kansas river somewhere within the limits of the Junction City district. "^^

In the seventeenth century a band of the New Mexican natives revolted from the Spaniards and founded a settlement in Quivira. It was known to the Spaniards as Cuartelejo. In recent years the site has been identified and excavated, i""

KANSAS A BORDER-LAND.

Some centuries before the Columbian discovery the Siouan Indians migrated westward from the region of the Appalachian mountains. At the time of the Spanish Conquest they had spread all over the more open regions of the Mississippi and Missouri valleys. To this race belonged the Dakotas on the north, and the Omahas, Kansas, and Wazhazhas (Osages) on the south. As the Siouan tribes pressed up the river valleys west lof the

Note 165. — The original records of Coronado's expedition have been collected, edited and translated by Geo. W. Winship, in the Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology. 1892-'93, part 1. pp..339-598: he has likewi.se published the English translations separately under the title "The Journey of Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, 1540-'42."

Note 166.— "Some Pueblo Ruins in Scott County, Kansas," by S. W. Williston and H. 'T. Martin, in the Kan. Hist. Coll.. vol. 6. 1897-1900, pp. 124-130.

Township 10, Range 4 east.

Missouri they came in conflict with the warUke Pawnees and Wichitas. By the seventeenth century Kansas had already become the border-land of the Siouan and Caddoan races. Each of the important rivers— the Kansas, the Osage and the Arkansas— was the highway of an invading tribe. The Kansas tribe eventually occupied the entire Kaw valley. It will thus be seen that the state owes its name to invaders from Missouri. On Vaugondy's map (1750) the eastern part of the state already appears as "Pays des Canses, " "Land of the Kansas [Indians] "; and the Pawnees still retained possession of the central and western parts of Nebraska and the northern part of Kansas. Their villages were in the Platte and the Republican valleys. ''*'

KANSAS THE FRONTIER BETWEEN THE POSSESSIONS OF FRANCE AND SPAIN, 1705-1803.

In the first quarter of the eighteenth century Kansas became the borderland between the colonial empires of France and Spain. The French made their first expedition to the mouth of the Kansas river in 1705. On September 27, 1719, M. Dutisne, a French oflRcer, took formal possession of the Pawnee country in the name of France. The following year the Spaniards

Note 167.— Winsor, the Mississippi Basin, p. 205.

52 The Wakefield Colony.

attempted to found a colony on the banks of the Missouri, but were massacred by the Indians. In 1722-'23 Fort Orleans, Mo., was founded by the French on an island near the mouth of the Osage river. The commandant, M. de Bourgmont, explored Kansas during the following year. "In 1725," says Spring, "Fort Orleans was captured by Kansas savages and the garrison slaughtered. Details are wholly unknown, as not a white man survived to tell the tale, and the stolid, close-mouthed Indian never broke silence. The massacre effectually blighted the enthusiasm of Frenchmen for explorations in Kansas. "'^^

KANSAS COMES UNDER THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE UNITED STATES.

Kansas was included in the Louisiana purchase of 1803, and was explored by Lieut. Zebulon M. Pike in 1806. On September 29 of that year Pike caused the Spanish flag to be lowered and the United States flag to be raised at Pawnee Republic (a village of the Pawnee Indians from which the Republican river derives its name). This was 265 years after the invasion of Coronado and 81 years after the destruction of Fort Orleans.

In 1831-'32 the United States began to remove the Indians from the Old Northwest to reservations in Kansas. In 1843 the Wyandots came from Ohio and settled in eastern Kansas. They remained in the state about twelve years (1843-'55).

Kansas was opened for settlement on May 30, 1854, and after seven years of checkered territorial history became a state in 1861.

NOTK 168.— " Kansas " ( in the Am. Commonwealth Series ), by L. W. Spring, p. 20.

The Wakefield Coloruj.

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

Public Affairs.

Local Events.

Timber Creek.

Madura (Wakefield).

IS54, March 30. The Kansas-Nebraska bill.

IS54, October 7. Hon. Andrew H. Reeder, first governor of the territory of Kansas, arrives at

Leavenworth. 1855, July 2-6. Session of the territorial legislature at Pawnee. (Ruins of the capitol to be seen in the military reservation at Fort Riley.)

I 1856 (April). Moses, William and Jeremiah Younkin and John King I settle on Timber creek (Grant township ).

1857, (spring). Messrs. Quimby and Payne settle in Republican township.

1858. ( May ). Rev. William Todd settles in Republican township.

1858, December 2. Edwin Younkin born. ( First child of American parentage in Grant township.)

1859, House on the Wakefield town site built by James Gilbert.

1860. July 25. Geo. Kirby born. (First child of American parentage in Gill township.)

1861, January 30. Kansas admitted as a state.

1866, (November). Lieut.-col. Geo. A. Custer assumes command at Fort Riley (till 1871).

I 1868, July 4. Madura schoolhouse opened. 1888, September 17. Battle of Arickaree ( Beecher's island ); decisive overthrow of the plains

Indians. 1868, (November). Hon. James M. Harvey, governor of Kansas. (Reelected 1870.)

I 1869, July 12. Messrs. Pierce and Wake inspect the land between ChapI man creek and the Wakefield town site.

I 1869, August 12. H. S. Walter and P. Gillies I settle in Republican township.

I 1869, August 21. John Wormald, Alexander Maitland, R. T. Batchelor. I and others, arrive in Junction City.

I 1869, August 21. The pioneer partly left England August 3, landed in New York on the I 15th, and reached Junction City on the 21st.

1869. August 25. Preliminary organization of the Kansas Land and

Emigration Company ("incorporated August 25. 1869"). 1869, August 26. The town site of Wakefield laid out by Richard Wake, John Wormald, Alexander Maitland, and Col. John S. Loomis.

1869. September 15. The "Nebraska party" sails from Liverpool, landing in New York on the 29th, and arrived in Junction City October 6.

1869, October 12. Meeting of the stockholders at the Hale House, Junction City.

1870, January 16. A severe blizzard occasions much suffering. I 1870, April 6. The Alsop party sailed from

Liverpool. On the 25th they are met at I Junction City by Rev. Richard Wake.

1870, (April). The opening of the company's store celebrated April 15. 1870, May 8. Methodist Episcopal church organized. 1870, May 30. The Wakefield Ferry and Bridge Company incorporated.

1870. (summer). Drought and failure of crops.

1871, January 25-March 8. Sessions of the Wakefield Agricultural and Literary Society recorded in the Wakefield Herald, vol. I, No. 3.

1871. (spring). Services of the Episcopal church first held at the

home of Mrs. Pearson, in Gill township. 1871, March 8. J. B. Quimby delivers an address before the society on

"How to Begin a Farm." 1871, (spring). Organization of the monthly market.

I 1871, April 5. The Sparrowhawk party leaves I England.

I 1872, (July). St. John's Episcopal church destroyed by a tornado.

1875, Hon. Thomas A. Osborn governor of Kansas (reelected, 1874).

1875. May 16. "George Grant imports stock for a 60,000-acre farm at Victoria, Ellis county."— Wtlder's Annals.

1874, Kansas devastated by grasshoppers.

1874, October 14. Vestry meeting of St. John's parish held at the residence of Dr. Chas. Hewitt.

1876. (April). St. John's church dedicated.

1876, June 25. Battle of Little Big Horn river ( Montana). Felix James Pitters, a Wakefield colonist, among the' slain.

