The text incident may be an example of what has been already referred to as "cross-correspondence," that is two widely separated automatists, giving somewhat similar replies, or giving a sentence the meaning of which is unintelligible until it is supplemented by a further communication through another automatist, who has no knowledge of the other fragmentary message. All this looks as if a single unseen personality controlled the two automatists, in order to avoid any explanation by telepathy or the subliminal self. The interesting point being, as I have pointed out already, that only since the death of Mr. Myers and Dr. Hodgson, — who were familiar with this favourite method of explaining away the significance of these messages, — have numerous cases of cross-correspondence arisen among independent and widely separated automatists.



Chapter XVI. Evidence of Identity in the Discarnate

"'The Ghost in man, the Ghost that once was man But cannot wholly free itself from man, Are calling to each other thro' a dawn Stranger than earth has ever seen; the veil Is rending and the voices of the day Are heard across the voices of the dark."

— Tennyson.

These well-known lines of our great poet are to-day receiving ampler confirmation than was thought possible a generation ago. In the present chapter I will cite some remarkable evidence of survival obtained through personal friends of my own.

I have previously given illustrations of the wonderful mediumistic power of the Rev. Stainton Moses and of the high regard in which he was held. No one who knew him could for a moment doubt, as Mr. Myers says, "his sanity or his sincerity, his veracity or his honour," and those who knew him personally, as I did, could understand the esteem and affection which his colleagues at University College School and his intimate friends always felt for him. I will here briefly narrate two remarkable cases in favour of the identity of the soi-disant spirit which came through Mr. Moses. These cases are well known to those familiar with the literature of spiritualism, but may not be known to many of my readers: —



The Abraham Florentine Case.

In August, 1874, Mr. Moses was staying with a friend, a medical man, in the Isle of Wight, and at one of the "sittings" which they had together a communication was received with singular impetuosity purporting to be from a spirit who gave the name Abraham Florentine, and stated that he had been engaged in the United States war of 1812, but only lately had entered into the spiritual world, having died at Brooklyn, U.S.A., on August 5th, 1874, at the age of eighty-three years, one month, and seventeen days. None present knew of such a person, but Mr. Moses published the particulars as above stated in a London newspaper, asking at the same time American journals to copy, so that, if possible, the statement made might be verified or disproved.

In course of time an American lawyer, a "claimagent," who had been auditing the claims of soldiers in New York, saw the paragraph, and wrote to an American newspaper to say that he had come across the name A. Florentine, and that a full record of the person who made the claim could be obtained from the U.S. Adjutant-General's office. Accordingly the headquarters of the U.S. army was applied to, and an official reply was received, stating that a private named Abraham Florentine had served in the American war in the early part of the century. Ultimately the widow of Abraham Florentine was found to be alive.

Dr. Crowell, a Brooklyn physician, by means of a directory, discovered her address in Brooklyn, and saw and questioned the widow. She stated that her husband had fought in the war of 1812, that he was a rather impetuous man, and had died in Brooklyn on August 5th, 1874, and that his eighty-third birthday was on the previous June 8th. He was therefore eighty-three years, one month, twenty-seven days old when he died, the only discrepancy being seventeen for twenty-seven days, a mistake that might easily have arisen in recording the message made through Mr. Moses when entranced in the isle of Wight. Full details of this case were published in Vol. XI of the "Proceedings of the S.P.R."

What are we to say to this evidence? The newspaper files remain to attest the facts, which seem to be absolutely irrefragable. The only surmise that can be made is that Mr. Moses had seen some notice of the man's death and career in an American newspaper, and either had forgotten the fact or had purposely deceived his friends. But then, this could only have been one of many similar cases of forgetfulness or deception, and before we can assume this we have to prove that Mr. Moses did obtain the required information by means of newspapers or other mundane channels of information. This Mrs. Moses is certain he did not, and no one as yet has been able to show that he did, or to find a particle of evidence on behalf of the wearisome and motiveless deception which must, in this event, habitually have characterised a man of spotless integrity and honour. Moreover, it is wholly unlikely an obscure private soldier should have an obituary notice in an American newspaper, or if it were so, that it should have been noted by English readers. In fine, after critically examining this case, Mr. F. W. H. Myers remarks: ''I hold that the surviving spirit of Abraham Florentine did really communicate with Mr. Moses. "

It is, however, necessary to submit every case of "spiritualistic" communication to the most rigorous scrutiny before deciding on its probable origin; what to a novice may seem to have an extra-terrene origin may really be a telepathic influence from some living person or the revival of some forgotten impression.

Long experience in the work of psychical research has shown the danger arising from what has been called cryptomnesia, i.e. a hidden memory. This explanation has indeed been suggested by some psychical researchers as possible in the foregoing case (unwarrantably I think), but it cannot apply to the next; which affords another of the remarkable

I'Troc. S. p. R.," Vol. XI, p. 407.

proofs of spirit identity obtained through the automatic writing of Mr. S. Moses.



The Blanche Abercromby Case.

The following case Mr. Myers considered to be one of extreme interest and value, owing to the fact that only after Mr. Moses' death a series of chances led Mr. Myers to discover additional proofs of its veracity. The spirit purporting to communicate through Mr. Moses was that of a lady known to Mr. Myers, and who will be called Blanche Abercromby. This lady died on a Sunday afternoon at a country house some 2CK) miles from London. Of her illness and death Mr. Moses knew absolutely nothing, but the same Sunday evening a. communication, purporting to come from her, and stating that "she had just quitted the body," was made to Mr. Moses at his secluded lodgings in London.

A few days later Mr. Moses' hand was again controlled by the same spirit and a few lines were written purporting to come from her and asserted by the spirit to be in her own handwriting, as a proof of her identity. There is no reason to suppose Mr. Moses had ever seen her handwriting, for he had only met her once casually at a seance. The facts ODmmunicated to Mr. Moses by the deceased lady were private; accordingly he mentioned the matter to no one, and gummed down the pages of the communication in his note book and marked it "private matter."

When after the death of Mr. Moses his documents were examined by Mr. Myers, he received permission from the executors to open these sealed pages. To his astonishment he found the communication to be from the lady whom he had known, and on comparing the handwriting of the script with letters from this lady when on earth he found the resemblance was incontestable. He submitted the matter to the lady's son and to an expert in handwriting and both affirmed that the spirit writing and that by the lady when living were from the same person. Numerous peculiarities were found common to the two, and the contents of the automatic script were also characteristic of the deceased lady. The ordinary handwriting of Mr. Moses is quite different from that which usually comes in his automatic script, and that again was wholly unlike the caligraphy in the present case.

Here no hypothesis of telepathy from the living, or forgotten memory, or the sub-liminal self of Mr. Moses, affords any explanation, and I regard this case as one of the strongest links in the chain of evidence on behalf of survival after death. As a rule the caligraphy of the automatic script is not the same as that of the person who purports to communicate, nor should we expect it to be so, if the communication be effected by telepathy from the deceased person.

There are however some other cases where the soi-disant spirit occasionally seems able to guide the hand of the medium so perfectly as to produce an accurate reproduction of the deceased's handwriting. A notable instance of this occurred in the case of the late Professor Henry Sidgwick, from whom a characteristic communication came through automatic writing to which his signature was affixed. This signature is identical with that in the many letters I received from Prof. Sidgwick when on earth, and here also there is no reason to believe the medium, a lady I know personally, had ever seen Professor Sidgwick's handwriting.

Bearing in mind the hypothesis of cryptomnesia, I will now cite some remarkable messages which were sent to us by my venerable friend the late Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the cousin and brother-in-law of Charles Darwin, and himself a well-known savant. Mr. Wedgwood was deeply interested in psychical research and had many sittings for automatic writing (by planchette) with two valued friends of his, "Mrs. R." and her sister "Mrs. V.," both of whom were psychic. In the present case Mrs. R. was the automatist, a lady known for some years to Mr. Fred. Myers, and of whose scrupulous good faith there can be no more question than of that of Mr. Wedgwood himself. Mrs. R. and Mr. Wedgwood sat opposite each other at a small table, the former with her left hand and

1 In Human Personality, Vol. II, p. i68, Mr. Myers refers to this element of handwriting as a proof of identity, and gives a remarkable case in point on p. 466. An able, critical paper by Sir H. Babington Smith, C.B., which discusses this and other evidence given by automatic writing, was published in Vol. V of the Proceedings S.P.R, the latter with his right on the planchette. Mr. Wedgwood states that the writing came upright to him but upside down to his partner, and so far from guiding the planchette his only difficulty was to avoid interfering with its rapid movement. His partner declared the same, and moreover could not have written rapidly, or at all, in this inverted manner. Mrs. R.'s notes, confirmed by Mr. Wedgwood, are as follows: —



The David Brainerd Case.

October 10th, Friday, at, Mr. Wedgwood and

I sitting. The board moved after a short pause and one preliminary circling.

"David — David — David — dead 143 years."

The butler at this moment announced lunch, and Mr. Wedgwood said to the soi-disant spirit, "Will you go on for us afterwards, as we must break off now?"

"I will try."

During lunch Mr. Wedgwood was reckoning up the date indicated as 1747, and conjecturing that the control was perhaps David Hume, whom he thought had died about then. On our beginning again to sit, the following was volunteered: —

"I am not Hume. I have come with Theodora's sister. I was attracted to her during her life in America. My work was in that land, and my earthly toil was cut short early, as hers has been. I died at thirty years old. I toiled five years, carrying forward the lamp of God's truth as I knew it."

Mr. Wedgwood remarked that he must have been a missionary.

"Yes, in Susquehannah and other places."

"Can you give any name besides David?"

"David Bra — David Bra — David Brain — David Braine — David Brain."

Mr. W.: "Do you mean that your name is Braine?"

"Very nearly right."

Mr. W.: "Try again."

"David Braine. Not quite all the name; right so far as it goes.... I was born in 171 7."

Mr. W.: "Are you an American?"

"America I hold to be my country as we consider things. I worked at " (sentence ends with a line of D's.)

After an interval Mr. Wedgwood said he thought it had come into his head who our control was. He had some recollection that in the 18th century a man named David Brainerd was missionary to the North American Indians. We sat again and the following was written: —

"I am glad you know me. I had not power to complete name or give more details. I knew that secret of the district. It was guarded by the Indians, and was made known to two independent circles. Neither of them succeeded, but the day will come that will uncover the gold."

It was suggested that this meant Heavenly truth.

"I spoke of earthly gold."

Mr. Wedgwood said the writing was so faint he thought power was failing.

"Yes, nearly gone. I wrote during my five years of work. It kept my heart alive."

Mr. Wedgwood writes: —

I could not think at first where I had ever heard of Brainerd, but I learn from my daughter in London that my sister-in-law, who lived with me 40 or 50 years ago, was a great admirer of Brainerd, and seemed to have an account of his life, but I am quite certain that I never opened the book and knew nothing of the dates, which are all correct, as well as his having been a missionary to the Susquehannahs.

My daughter has sent me extracts from his life, stating that he was born in 1718 and not 1717 as planchette wrote. But the Biographical Dictionary says that he died in 1747, aged 30.

Mrs. R. writes that she had no knowledge whatever of David Brainerd before this.

The Biographical Dictionary gives the following: —

**Brainerd, David. A celebrated American missionary, who signalised himself by his successful endeavours to convert the Indians on the Susquehannah, Delaware, etc. Died, aged 30, 1 747."

It is perhaps noteworthy in connection with the last sentence of the planchette writing that in the life of Brainerd by Jonathan Edwards extracts given from his journal show that he wrote a good deal, e.g., "Feb. 3, 1744. Could not but write as well as meditate," etc. "Feb. 15, 1745. Was engaged in writing almost all the day." He invariably speaks of comfort in connection with writing.

The other case given by Mr. Wedgwood is too lengthy to quote in detail, but a brief summary is given because, like the preceding, it is one of the few cases where the soi-disant spirit asserts he lived on earth very many years ago.



The Colonel Gurwood Case.

In this case the automatist was also Mr, Wedgwood's friend Mrs. R., a lady of unimpeachable integrity as already stated, and the mode of sitting with planchette was the same as described in the previous case. The sitting took place in June, 1889, and is recorded in the Journal of the S.P.R. for that year. Notes of the sitting were written at the time and the planchette writing copied.

As soon as the sitting began planchette wrote that a spirit was present who wanted to draw; forthwith a rough drawing was made of the top of an embattled wall, or mural coronet, from which an arm holding a sword arose. Planchette wrote, "Sorry I can't do better, was meant for a test, J.G." Asked what the drawing represented, the answer came, "Something that was given me." Asked if J.G. was a man or woman, planchette wrote "Man, John G." Mr. Wedgwood said he knew a J. Giffard, was that right? The reply came, "Not Giffard, John Gurwood, no connection of yours." Asked how he died, "I killed myself on Christmas Day; it will be forty-four years ago next Christmas," i.e. in 1845. Asked if he were in the army, the reply came, "Yes, but it was the pen, not the sword that did for me." Asked if pen was right, and if so, was he an author who failed? the reply was "Yes, pen, I did not fail, the pen was too much for me after the wound." Asked where he was wounded the reply was "In the Peninsular in the head, I was wounded in 1810." Asked if the drawing was a crest and had anything to do with the wound planchette wrote "It came from that and was given me, the drawing was a test; remember my name, power fails to explain, stop now."

Mr. Wedgwood then recalled that a Colonel Gurwood edited the despatches of the Duke of Wellington, but he had never read any history of the Peninsular war and knew no details of Gurwood's life or of his crest: Mrs. R. was wholly ignorant of the matter. After the sitting Mr. Wedgwood looked up the matter and found that Colonel Gurwood led the forlorn hope at the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo in 1812, and the Annual Register states that he then "received a wound in the skull which affected him for the remainder of his life." In recognition of his bravery he received a grant of arms in 1812, which are specified in the Book of Family Crests, — and symbolised in the crest, — as follows, "Out of a mural coronet, a ruined castle in centre, and therefrom an arm, holding a scimitar." The drawing given as a test is practically this crest, though the ruined castle was doubtless too difficult to be drawn by planchette. Furthermore, the Annual Register for 1 845 states that Colonel Gurwood committed suicide on Chistmas Day that year, in a fit of despondency, and remarks that it was probably owing to the overstrain caused by his laborious work in editing the despatches; this explains the automatic writing, "Pen was too much for me after the wound." None of these facts were known to Mr. Wedgwood or Mrs. R. before the automatic writing came.

* Planchette wrote 1810, if the figures were correctly read.

In subsequent sittings Colonel Gurwood again controlled planchette and gave some further details of his life, the storming of the fort and names of persons, all of which were found to be correct so far as they could be verified. But the evidential value of these later sittings must be discounted, owing to the fact that Mr. Wedgwood had meanwhile looked up Napier's Peninsular War and might have gained some of the information from its pages.

Many other striking illustrations of survival after death might be given, but the reader who is interested must go to the original papers to which I have referred earlier. Sir Oliver Lodge has had some remarkable cases of "spirit identity" through other automatists, and especially through Mrs. Piper, with whom he has had numerous sittings. These cases he has critically investigated: many of them relate to himself and his family, revealing facts entirely unknown to the medium and at the time unknown to Sir Oliver, which subsequently have been found to be correct. The conviction to which Sir Oliver has been driven, from his own personal and long continued experience, and which he has publicly avowed, is that there is undeniably evidence of survival after death.

One of the most recent cases corroborative of this conclusion relates to messages purporting to come from his gallant and beloved son Lieut. Raymond Lodge, who lost his life in the war. Particulars of this case were read before the Society for Psychical Research, and I made an abstract of that paper, — kindly revised by Sir. O. Lodge, — for insertion in this place. But since then Sir Oliver has published his work "Raymond," where additional evidence is given, and as this book has been so widely read and noticed in the press it seems needless to refer to the matter further. Moreover, nearly all the evidence I have cited has come through private and unpaid mediums, and this was not the case in all the Raymond messages.

The Right Hon. Gerald Balfour has recently (Dec. 1916) read a paper before the S.P.R., which in the opinion of some competent judges affords the most striking evidence of survival yet obtained. For it apparently demonstrates the continued and vigorous mental activity of the late Professor A. W. Verrall and the late Professor Butcher, both eminent classical scholars. The evidence exhibits a range of knowledge, and constructive ability in framing a classical puzzle, such as could not be accounted for by telepathy, or the subliminal self of the automatist. The automatic script came through a lady who is well known to Mr. Balfour, and to whom reference has already been made under her pseudonym of "Mrs. Willett."

Mr. Balfour affirms with confidence that Mrs. Willett is as little familiar with classical subjects as the average of educated women. Nevertheless recondite classical allusions like the "Ear of Dionysius" (which forms the title of Mr. Balfour's paper) and other obscure topics were given in the script, the whole forming a literary puzzle which remained insoluble, until later on the script furnished the key. Mr. Balfour says it is difficult to suppose that the materials employed in the construction of this puzzle could have been drawn from the mind of any living person; he believes they must be ascribed to some disembodied intelligence or intelligences, and there are cogent reasons for believing that the real authors were, — as they profess to be, — the late Professors Verrall and Butcher. The paper will shortly be published in the 'Pro'ceedings" of the S.P.R.



Chapter XVII. Evidence from Abroad of Survival

"There is no death, what seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life Elysian, Whose portal we call death."

— Longfellow.

It must be borne in mind that competent psychical researchers in other parts of the world besides the United Kingdom have for many years past been at work, and obtained what they deemed to be conclusive evidence of survival. In this chapter I will cite a fragment of the evidence that comes to us from America and Russia.

No investigator of psychical phenomena has given more time to the critical investigation of the evidence on behalf of survival than the late Dr. Hodgson during his residence in the United States. In fact he made this subject practically his sole occupation for many years before his death. He was so far from being credulous that he detected and exposed many spurious phenomena, and in my opinion he carried his scepticism too far as regards other mediums than Mrs. Piper, with whom he had innumerable sittings. At first he attempted to explain away the results he obtained through Mrs. Piper; but ultimately was driven to the spirit hypothesis; his own words are: "Having tried the hypothesis of telepathy from the living for several years... I have no hesitation in affirming with the most absolute assurance that the 'spirit' hypothesis is justified by its fruits and the other hypothesis is not."

The conclusion at which Dr. Hodgson arrived, after his prolonged and critical experimental study of Mrs. Piper, he summed up in the following words: —

"At the present time I cannot profess to have any doubt but that the chief 'communicators' to whom I have referred in the foregoing pages [of his report] are veritably the personalities that they claim to be, that they have survived the change we call death, and that they have directly communicated with us whom we call living, through Mrs. Piper's entranced organism."

However improbable sceptics may consider this conclusion, we must remember that Dr. Hodgson began his long and arduous investigation with just the same doubt and even

1 "Proc. S.P.R.," Vol. XIII, p. 406.

disbelief in the "spiritualistic" hypothesis as any of his critics may entertain. Moreover he was not only a remarkably sane and shrewd investigator, but one specially skilled in exposing fraud and illusion. This was shown, as I have remarked, by his exposure of various alleged spiritualistic phenomena which had mystified and baffled some of the ablest enquirers. Hence those who have not had Dr. Hodgson's experience have no right to place mere notions of what is probable and improbable, or possible and impossible, against his deliberate opinion, arrived at after many years of patient and painstaking enquiry.

If it appeared that any other competent investigator, after an equally exhaustive research, had come to an opposite conclusion, sceptics would be justified in their hesitancy to accept the experimental evidence of survival after death. But this is precisely what cannot be adduced. On the contrary, so far as I know, every trained observer, of any nationality, who has devoted years to a similar experimental research, either has arrived at practically the same conclusion as Dr. Hodgson and other able investigators, or has been forced to admit that the phenomena in question are at present wholly inexplicable.

Since Dr. Hodgson's death his work in America has been chiefly carried on by his friend Dr. J. H. Hyslop, formerly Professor at Columbia University. Dr. Hyslop, who now lives in New York, has devoted his life to this work and is pre-eminent as an able, courageous and indefatigable worker at psychical research. Amid his amazingly voluminous contributions to the 'Proceedings'* and 'Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research/' there are numerous papers affording striking evidences of survival after death. This evidence has driven him to abandon the agnostic views he formerly held and become a convinced believer in the spirit hypothesis. As Dr. Hyslop is a trained psychologist his opinion is all the more valuable.

During the last six years Dr. Hyslop has had constant sittings with a lady, Mrs. Chenoweth (pseudonym), who has developed strong mediumistic powers. The following is a brief narrative of one of the evidential cases of survival obtained through Mrs. Chenoweth, whose entire trustworthiness and honesty are not disputed. This case illustrates the trivial nature of the incidents given to afford identification.



The Tausch Case.

Dr. Hyslop states that he received a letter from a lady in Germany, of whom he had never heard before, asking him if he could recommend a psychic, as she had recently lost her husband, and In her great distress wanted to find some evidence that would assure her of her husband's continued existence. Dr. Hyslop answered that he knew of no psychic in Germany, but if she would come to America he would arrange for sittings with a psychic in whom he had confidence. The lady replied that this was impossible, but gave the name (different from her own) and address of a sister in Boston, U.S.A., who might take her place.

Accordingly Dr. Hyslop arranged for the sister to meet him, but gave her no information of the psychic's name or address, nor did he give any information to the psychic (Mrs. Chenoweth) of the visitor or the object of the sitting. Before admitting the visitor Dr. Hyslop put Mrs. Chenoweth into a trance state, when the normal faculties are in abeyance; in fact, Dr. Hyslop was satisfied that the medium did not even know whether her visitor was a man or a woman.

Automatic writing by Mrs. Chenoweth's hand began and the unseen communicator indicated that a gentleman was present who was anxious to make his existence known to his wife, that he was a philosopher and a friend of the late Professor William James of Harvard, that his mother was dead, and to indicate his identity pointed to a cavity in his mouth where a tooth had been extracted. Of course none of these facts were known to Dr. Hyslop, but in the hope they might apply to the husband of the lady who wrote to him, he communicated them to the widow in Germany and found they were all correct; her husband had been a lecturer on philosophy, was a friend of Prof. W. James and had lost a tooth, though the cavity was not visible. Then the unseen communicator stated the gentleman just before his decease, had great pain in his head, with confusion of ideas and longed for home, adding that he was not away from home where he died, but it was not like his home. All this turned out to be true, he died in his old home in Germany and not in his home in America.

Then some striking evidence of identity came, the communicator stated the deceased wished to prove that he was not a fool to believe in spirits, and that he was geratly interested in some records which had been lent to him "by his friend James." In response to Dr. Hyslop's enquiries the widow wrote that before her husband's death Prof. James had lent him some records to read which had impressed hira. All present at the sitting were of course wholly ignorant of this and of the other incidents. The unseen communicator went on to say that he was fond of fixing things and putting clocks to right; that he used to annotate his books and apparently attempted to sign his name, for the letters T. h. came. In reply to enquiries the widow wrote to Dr. Hyslop that her husband did fuss a great deal about clocks, that he annotated his books and always read with a pencil in his hand. Now the name of the deceased was Tausch, the first and last letters of which were given.

Later on the comniunicator made great efforts to give his name, by automatic writing through the entranced Mrs. Chenoweth, and without any help from Dr. Hyslop (who of course knew the name but no other particulars) there came "Taussh, Tauch and Taush," phonetically correct. Dr. Hyslop then addressed the communicator in German and got replies in German, among them that the visitor was his

"Geschwlster," which was correct, though Mrs. Chenoweth (through whom of course the automatic writing came) only knew four words of German, not included in these replies. Other points of interest establishing identity also came, such as that the deceased used to carry a small bag containing his manuscripts and reading glass, and that he had taken a long railway journey shortly before his death. In reply to enquiry Mrs. Tausch wrote that her husband always used to carry a small bag in which he put his manuscripts and eye glasses, and that he had taken a long rail journey shortly before his death.

Dr. Hyslop says, all the incidents described were unknown to him and required confirmation by correspondence with Mrs. Tausch in Germany, the only living person who knew their truth. Nor in all his years of sittings with Mrs. Chenoweth has Dr. Hyslop ever had any communications containing similar incidents to those above described. The name might have been filched by telepathy from Dr. Hyslop's mind, but there is no evidence that Mrs. Chenoweth has the slightest telepathic percipience. Even if Mrs. Chenoweth had known the name and address of Mrs. Tausch in Germany (which, of course, she did not), she could not have communicated with her, as only 36 hours elapsed from the first to the last sitting. There was no one in America who could have given her the information.

I agree with Dr. Hyslop that no adequate explanation of this case by telepathy or sub-liminal knowledge or collusion on the part of the medium can be given, and that the simplest and most reasonable solution is that the information was derived from the mind of the deceased person.

But I must draw to a close my imperfect selection from the mass of first-hand evidence that is being accumulated in proof of spirit identity.

The following case is chosen because it comes from wholly independent and able investigators in Russia. Here, too, any explanation based on collusion, telepathy, or the knowledge of those present, is out of the question. Unfortunately the evidence is somewhat lengthy, but as it combines the manifestation of physical phenomena with evidence of the identity of the communicating intelligence, it forms an important link between the two classes of phenomena. No paid or professional mediums were present, and the bona fides of all taking part appears to be unquestionable.

This case is quoted from Vol. VI of the 'Proceedings" of the S.P.R., where the reader will find other similar evidential cases in a valuable paper by Mr. F. W. H. Myers.



The Pereliguine Case.

A sitting was held in the house of M. A. Nartzeff, at Tambof, Russia, on Nov. 18th, 1887. M. Nartzeff belongs to the Russian nobility and is a landed proprietor; his aunt, housekeeper and the official physician to the municipality of Tambof were the only other persons present.

The sitting began at 10 p.m. at a table placed in the middle of the room, by the light of a night-light placed on the mantelpiece. All doors were closed. The left hand of each sitter was placed on the right hand of his neighbour, and each foot touched the neighbour's foot, so that during the whole of the sitting all hands and feet were under control. Sharp raps were heard in the floor, and afterwards in the wall and the ceiling, after which the blows sounded immediately in the middle of the table, as if someone had struck it from above with his fist; and with such violence, and so often, that the table trembled the whole time.

M. Nartzeff asked, "Can you answer rationally, giving three raps for yes, one for no?" "Yes." "Do you wish to answer by using the alphabet?" "Yes." "Spell your name." The alphabet was repeated, and the letters indicated by three raps — "Anastasie Pereliguine." "I beg you to say now why you have come and what you desire." "I am a wretched woman. Pray for me. Yesterday, during the day, I died at the hospital. The day before yesterday I poisoned myself with matches." "Give us some details about yourself. How old were you? Give a rap for each year." Seventeen raps. "Who were you?" "I was housemaid. I poisoned myself with matches." "Why did you poison yourself?" "I will not say. I will say nothing more."

After this a heavy table which was near the wall, outside the chain of hands, came up rapidly three times towards the table round which the chain was made, and each time it was pushed backwards, no one knew by what means. Seven raps (the signal agreed upon for the close of the sitting), were now heard in the wall; and at 11.20 p.m. the seance came to an end.

( Here follow the signatures of all those present, with their attestation.)

Those who were present also signed the following attestation: —

"The undersigned having been present at the seance of November 18th, 1887, at the house of M. A. N. Nartzeff, hereby certify that they had no previous knowledge of the existence or the death of Anastasie Pereliguine, and that they heard her name for the first time at the above mentioned seance."

Enquiries were then made as to the truth of the message purporting to have come from an unknown suicide. Dr. Touloucheff, the official physician who was present at the sitting, and who signed the above documents, states that at first he did not believe there was any truth in the message. For he writes: —

"In my capacity as physician of the municipality I am at once informed by the police of all cases of suicide. But as Pereliguine had added that her death had taken place at the hospital, and since at Tambof we have only one hospital, that of the 'Institutions de Bienfaisance,' which is not within my official survey, and whose authorities, in such cases as this, themselves send for the police, or the magistrate; — I sent a letter to my colleague. Dr. Sundblatt, the head physician of this hospital, and without explaining my reason simply asked him to inform me whether there had been any recent case of suicide at the hospital, and, if so, to give me the name and particulars. The following is a copy of his reply, certified by Dr. Sundblatt's own signature.

(Signed) "N. Touloucheff."

"November 19th, 1887. "My dear Colleague, — On the i6th of this month I was on duty; and on that day two patients were admitted to the Hospital, who had poisoned themselves with phosphorous. The first, Vera Kosovitch, aged 38, wife of a clerk in the public service... was taken in at 8 p.m.; the second a servant named Anastasie Pereliguine, aged 17, was taken in at lO p.m. This second patient had swallowed, besides an infusion of boxes of matches, a glass of kerosene, and at the time of her admission was already very ill. She died at i p.m. on the 17th, and the post-mortem examination has been made to-day. Kosovitch died yesterday, and the post-mortem is fixed for to-morrow. Kosovitch said that she had taken the phosphorous in an access of melancholy, but Pereliguine did not state her reason for poisoning herself.

(Signed) "Th. Sundblatt."

When M. NartzeiiE was asked if the housekeeper, who was at the sitting, could possibly have heard of the suicide, he replied as follows: —

"In answer to your letter I inform you that my aunt's housekeeper is not a housekeeper strictly speaking, but rather a friend of the family, having been nearly fifteen years with us, and possessing our entire confidence. She could not have already learnt the fact of the suicide, as she had no relations or friends in Tambof, and never leaves the house.

"The hospital in question is situated at the other end of the town, about 5 versts from my house. Dr.

Sundblatt informs me, on the authority of the procesverbal of the inquest, that Pereliguine was able to read and write. (This was in answer to the enquiry whether the deceased could have understood alphabetic communication. ) "

There are few cases which in my opinion afford so simple and striking a demonstration of the identity of the discarnate personality as the foregoing. There was no professional medium; all the witnesses concerned give their full names; they are persons of repute, and after the facts were published their testimony was never impugned.

Those who remain in doubt as to the value of the evidence adduced in the foregoing chapters should remember that it is, and probably always will be, impossible to obtain such conclusive logical demonstration of survival after death as will satisfy every agnostic. But "formal logical sequence" as Cardinal Newman said in his ''Grammar of Assent," "is not, in fact, the method by which we are enabled to become certain of what is concrete... The real and necessary method... is the cumulation of probabilities, independent of each other, arising out of the nature and circumstances of the particular case which is under review," and so the truth of the spirit hypothesis, and of spirit-identity, like the truth of all disputed matters, is to be judged in this way, — that is, by the whole evidence taken together/

In concluding this chapter I wish to draw attention to a valuable and brightly written work in two volumes, strangely entitled "On the Cosmic Relations," by Mr. Henry Holt, the widely esteemed American publisher. In this work Mr. Holt gives a mass of evidence obtained by himself, as well as by Dr. Hodgson and others, that has convinced him of the existence of super-normal phenomena, and the impossibility of explaining away by telepathy or otherwise the evidence on behalf of survival after bodily death.

1 Kant knew nothing of the telepathy or psychical research, but even his critical mind admitted that "in regard to ghost stories, while I doubt any one of them, still I have a certain faith in the whole of them taken together." — Dreams of a Spirit Seer, p. 88.



Part V



Chapter XVIII. Clairvoyance: Psychology of Trance Phenomena

"We all walk in mysteries. We are surrounded by an atmosphere of which we do not know what is stirring in it, or how it is connected with our own spirit. So much is certain, that in particular cases we can put out the feelers of our soul beyond its bodily limits, and that a presentiment, nay, an actual insight into the immediate future, is accorded to it."

Many difficulties and perplexing problems arise in reviewing the brief and imperfect outline of spiritualistic phenomena that I have attempted to give in the preceding pages. These it is desirable to consider in the present and succeeding chapter.

Some of these difficulties may be removed when we obtain a fuller knowledge of the

1 Goethe, "Conversations with Eckermann," Bohn's Library, p. 290.

whole subject. Those of my readers who approach these problems for the first time will, of course, bear in mind that only a fragment of the already accessible evidence could be presented within the compass of a small volume. Moreover, I have been obliged to omit certain portions of the wide field of psychical research, which have received prolonged and critical investigation, and must be considered in any explanation of spiritualistic phenomena. One of these is telepathy, now largely accepted, and to which I will return in the last chapter; another is alleged clairvoyance. On this latter a few words must now be said.

The term clairvoyance unfortunately is used to denote two distinct aspects of super-normal faculty. In one sense it is employed to express the transcendental perception of distant scenes or of hidden material objects. That such a faculty exists I have not the least doubt; it may be evoked in the higher stages of hypnotic trance or it may occur in certain sensitives in their normal state. Mrs. H. Sidgwick has published a searching investigation of what has been called "travelling

1 In a letter published in the London Times so long ago as 1876, I said that before we could hope to arrive at any definite conclusions upon alleged spirit communications we must know whether clairvoyance and (what is now called) telepathy really exist.

clairvoyance," and in my lengthy researches on the so-called Divining — or Dowsing — rod, I have shown that a good dowser unquestionably possesses a somewhat similar faculty, though one unrecognised by science. The term telaesthesia has been suggested by Mr. F. W. H. Myers for this faculty; implying the perception of terrestrial objects or conditions independently of the recognised channels of sense, and also independently of any possible knowledge derived from telepathy.

The word clairvoyance has also been used to denote the transcendental vision of beings on another plane of existence. It is alleged that many mediums have this faculty in their normal state, or in their entranced condition, and also in their "waking stage" between the two. Here also the evidence on behalf of such a faculty appears to me indisputable; but the difficulty of obtaining conclusive evidence on this point is great, owing to the possible intrusion of telepathy, — that convenient and hard worked hypothesis.

I have little doubt that clairvoyance in both its meanings, as well as telepathy, enter largely into, and afford some explanation of, the communications which purport to come

1 See Proceedings S.P.R., Vol. VII et seq.

2 See Proceedings S.P.R., Vols. XIII and XV; also for a brief resume of the whole subject see Chap. XII of my book on Psychical Research in the "Home University Library."

from the spirit world. But we must assume telepathy from the dead as well as the living, and we need evidence that the medium actually possesses power as a percipient, or unconscious receiver, of a telepathic impress. It is quite time experimental psychologists and psychical researchers should admit that super-normal phenomena do occur, and test, as well as propose, various theories, now often advanced without proof.

Students of psychical research will find the most important and critical examination of the psychology of the trance phenomena of spiritualism in the monograph by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, which fills the bulky volume of the ''Proceedings of the S.P.R." for December, 1915. This laborious research deals with Mrs. Piper's trance phenomena — but applies more or less fully to other genuine mediums — when evidence is afforded of knowledge acquired otherwise than through the senses, whether from the living or from the dead. The object of the paper is to throw light on the question

"Whether the intelligence that speaks or writes in the trance, and is sometimes in telepathic communication with other minds (whether of the living or of the dead) is other than a phase, or centre of consciousness, of Mrs. Piper herself."

Mrs. Sidgwick emphatically admits that Mrs. Piper has super-normal means of obtaining knowledge, but comes to the conclusion that Mrs. Piper's trance, and presumably that of other similar mediums —

"Is probably a state of self-Induced hypnosis in which her hypnotic self personates difEerent characters either consciously and deliberately, or unconsciously and believing herself to be the person she represents, and sometimes probably in a state of consciousness intermediate between the two... And further... she can obtain perfectly, and for the most part fragmentarily, telepathic impressions... Such impressions are not only received by her as the result of her own telepathic activity or that of other spirits — spirits of the living or may be of the dead — but rise partially or completely into the consciousness operating in the trance communications, and so are recognized."

Telepathy from the living, and also sometimes from the discarnate, combined with a real or imaginary dissociation of personality of the medium during the trance state, is therefore Mrs. Sidgwick's view of such phenomena. This was in substance Dr. Hodgson's opinion in the earlier stage of his investigations. But, as Mrs. Sidgwick says, "he had apparently already abandoned this hypothesis when he published his first re-

» "Proceedings S.P.R.," Vol. XXVIII, p. 330.

port." As is well known, and was previously mentioned, p. 223, Dr. Hodgson and Mr. Myers, like many other critical students, eventually were driven to accept the spirit hypothesis as the most consistent and simplest solution.

Mrs. Sidgwick's conclusions are unquestionably entitled to careful consideration, and doubtless will commend themselves to many psychologists and conservative thinkers. To a large extent, if without presumption I may express an opinion, I believe they are justified, and explain many of the perplexing anomalies, false statements and personation of great names, in these trance communications.

Thus in a sitting with Mrs. Piper, in 1899, the Jewish lawgiver "Moses of old" purported to communicate, and prophesied that in the near future there would be great wars and bloodshed and then the approach of the millennium. But in this great war Russia and France would be on one side against England and America on the other, whilst Germany would not take any serious part in the war. After this "Moses" added a good deal of solemn twaddle.

Then another time Sir Walter Scott purports to communicate and tells Dr. Hodgson that if he wishes to know anything about the planet Mars he was to be sure to call up the novelist, as he had visited all the planets; asked if he had seen a planet further away than Saturn, the soi-disant Walter Scott answered "Mercury!" Julius Caesar also purports to control and Madame Guyon; but another and more frequent control was George Eliot (the novelist), who sometimes acts as the communicator, for she says,

"We speak by thought unless we act upon some machine, so-called medium, when our thoughts are expressed to the controlling spirit who registers them for us."

This may be tfue enough; but the real George Eliot would never speak so ungrammatically as to say, "I hardly know as there is enough light to communicate," or again, "Do not know as I have ever seen a haunted house," words which are reported to be her own. Similar grammatical mistakes are made by other educated controls.

But some of the most conclusive evidence of personation is given by the control who purported to be the Rev. Stainton Moses. The names of three spirit friends (the "Imperator band"), whom the real Stainton Moses could never have forgotten, were given, and "not one of these names is true or has the least semblance of truth," Professor Newbold tells us. Again Dr. Stanley Hall in a sitting with Mrs. Piper, asked if a niece, Bessie Beals, could communicate?

She professed to come and gave various messages at several sittings, but she had never existed, Dr. Hall having given a fictitious name and relationship!

Thus it will be seen that we cannot take these communications at their face value, as they are sometimes manifestly false, although presented to the sitter with a dramatic distinctness and corresponding character, which give them a life-like reality. They probably represent phases of the hypnotic self of Mrs. Piper, created by some verbal or telepathic suggestion from the mind of the sitter. In spite of this unquestionable personation of deceased personalities Mrs. Sidgwick admits that —

"Veridical communications are received, some of which, there is good reason to believe come from the dead, and therefore imply a genuine communicator in the background" (p. 204).

Here it is well to note the meaning attached to the words "control" and "communicator." By the former is meant the intelligence which is, or professes to be, in direct communication with the sitter through the voice or writing of the medium. By "communicator" is meant the intelligence for which the control acts as amanuensis or interpreter, or whose remarks or telepathic impress the control repeats to the sitter through the medium. This definition, given by Mrs. Sidgwick, is generally accepted.

The difficulties of communicating are necessarily great, as we cannot suppose that a physical process or physical organs of speech and hearing are employed by the communicators. In fact they tell us, as Swedenborg told us long before telepathy was discovered, that spirits converse by thought. Visual perception is sometimes suggested. One unseen communicator says:

"If you could see me as I stand here, you would see every gesture I make, which is copied by Rector [the control]; he imitates me as I speak to you."

Mental pictures, as Dr. Hyslop has stated, float before the mind of the medium and the difficulty seems to be in selecting the appropriate one. Difficulties of hearing, or telepathic percipience, are also mentioned, especially the difficulty in getting a name. Then there is mind wandering and mental confusion, one communicator, speaking through Mrs. Piper, says: —

"I am talking as it were through a thick fog and it often suffocates me," and again, "I can't get the right word, my mind is so confused"; "the conditions are suffocating."

The sceptic, of course, will assert this is only the clever way the medium assumes to cloak her ignorance, but there is every reason to believe it represents a genuine difficulty in the transmission of ideas from the unseen to the seen. We know the uncertain conditions of telepathy here, and they may exist on the other side when the control is trying to impress ideas on the sub-conscious self of the medium.

Some light is thus thrown on the scrappy, disjointed, and confused nature of many veridical messages. The primary need of establishing their identity probably explains why the communications are so largely fragmentary reminiscences of the earth life of the deceased.

Whilst the bulk of the communications appear to exhibit a truncated, dream-like intelligence on the part of the deceased, — as if a dream zone intervened between the two worlds, — this is not always the case. Some recent scripts, as in Mr. Gerald Balfour's paper on the Ear of Dionysius, show not only the co-operation of two or more discarnate minds, but also, as stated on p. 220, give positive evidence of an ability and wide classical knowledge, quite beyond the power of the automatist. The cryptic allusions, it is true, need considerable ingenuity, learning and skill to make the evidence intelligible to ordinary minds. This recondite mode of communication may be adopted to prevent suspicion that the message is derived from terrene minds by telepathy or other sources of error. Those who have not the necessary time or knowledge to unravel these mosaics of classical scholarship, must rest content with the assurance that competent and unbiassed investigators have been convinced that they afford convincing evidence of the identity of the deceased persons from whom they profess to come.



Chapter XIX. Difficulties and Objections Considered

"But trust that those we call the dead Are breathers of an ampler day For ever nobler ends."

— In Memoriam, cxviii.

In the course of our discussion we have seen a dreary agnosticism, and the materialistic tendency of scientific enquiry and modern commercialism, confronted with the indisputable facts of psychical research. The revolution in thought which those facts imply and necessitate, will in course of time be apparent, and be a great gain both to knowledge and religion.

There remain, however, many unsolved problems. Why are the unseen communicators so seldom conscious of other friends on earth, outside the narrow circle of the sitters? Are earth memories only revived by some association of ideas in the communicator or control with those in the minds of the circle? Why have we no messages that will stand critical enquiry, from the greatest or the saintliest men and women who once lived on earth? Why is there no clear and consistent account of the surroundings, and the occupation, of those who have passed into the spiritual world? These and many other questions naturally arise and we can only hope that in the future more light may be thrown upon these perplexities.

There has certainly been a thinning of the veil which separates us from those who have passed into the unseen, but one is tempted to ask why only a corner of the veil has been lifted here and there, and no full revelation given to us of life in the spiritual world? Moreover, what is given appears so inadequate and so unsatisfying.

But it is probable we shall never be able to see behind the veil with the clearness and assurance that Swedenborg claimed to possess, although he warned others off the ground he trod. There may be, and are I believe, good reasons for this obscure vision. If everyone were as certain as they are of day following night, that after the momentary darkness of death they would pass into an endless life of brightness and freedom, such as many spiritualists depict, it is possible few would wish to remain on earth. May be multitudes of earth-worn and weary souls would resort to some painless and lethal drug, that would enable them to enter a realm where they hoped their troubles would be for ever ended. A vain and foolish hope, for the discipline of life on earth is necessary for us all, and none can hope to attain a higher life without the educative experience of trial and conflict.

Doubtless much of the scepticism that exists in religious minds, as to the genuineness of these automatic communications, arises from the belief that messages which might reach us from beyond this life would authenticate themselves by their elevated wisdom and piety, or by their transcendent knowledge. Such a belief has its root in the popular notion that at death we are suddenly transformed by our passage out of this world into a state of sublime holiness and wisdom, or else of utter and hopeless misery. The good are supposed to enter at once into their final state of endless bliss, and the evil, by their transition from earth, into their final state of an endless Hell. One of the immense benefits which Swedenborg has conferred on theology is the shattering of this crude medieval creed, — not only among his followers, but in a much wider circle; and to-day the same may be said of spiritualism, which confutes the popular idea of heaven and hell and teaches us the continuity of our existence here and hereafter. Long ago Milton with singular prescience wrote: —

"What if earth Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things in each To other like, more than on earth is thought?"

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who has publicly expressed his belief in Spiritualism, remarks: "We find ourselves in apparent communication with the dead very shortly after they leave us, and they seem to be exactly as they were before we parted"; and he adds that though Spiritualism is in no way antagonistic to Christianity it removes many of the crude conceptions and modifies some of the doctrines which are popularly held.

Turning now to those who, like the Roman Catholics and many others, believe all spiritualistic phenomena to be the work of evil spirits and therefore to be shunned, the best reply is "by their fruits ye shall know them." We are told "to believe not every spirit but prove the spirits whether they are of God." An able Roman Catholic layman, Mr. J. G. Raupert, who has had considerable experience of Spiritualism, has written much on the dangers of this subject, and with much that he says I agree; but like the late Monsignor Benson he naturally regards the whole matter as one banned by his Church, and therefore as he remarks, ''it Is an eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree of knowledge."

Most of the anathemas pronounced against spiritualism by Protestant and Roman ecclesiastics come from the lips of men who know little or nothing of the subject. Some who have taken the trouble to enquire, have come to believe that spiritism reveals the existence of some mysterious power which may be of a more or less malignant character.

Certainly the Apostle Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians, points to a race of spiritual creatures, not made of flesh and blood, inhabiting the air around us, and able injuriously to affect mankind. Good as well as mischievous agencies doubtless exist in the unseen; this, of course, is equally true if the phenomena are due to those who have once lived on the earth. "There are as great fools in the spirit world as there ever were in this," as Henry More said over 200 years ago. In any case, granting the existence of a spiritual world, it is necessary to be on our guard against the invasion of our will by a lower order of intelligence and morality.

The danger to the medium lies, in my

Miss H. A. Dallas has written an admirable little book dealing with the objections to spiritualism from a religious point of view, and furnishes a cogent reply to many of the points raised by Mr. Raupert.

opinion, not only in the loss of spiritual stamina, but in the possible deprivation of that birth-right we each are given to cherish, our individuality, our true self-hood; just as in another vay this may be impaired by sensuality, opium, or alcohol.

The great object of our life on earth appears to be, on the one hand, the upbuilding, strengthening, and perpetuation of our separate and distinct personalities; and, on the other, the awakening and development in each of the consciousness of an underlying Unity, which links each person into a larger Personal Life common to all, "in Whom we live and move and have our being"; in a word, the realisation of the fact that we are integral parts and members of one Body. In so far as Spiritualism aids or thwarts these objects its moral effect must be judged; like mysticism, I think it aids the latter object, but is apt to endanger the former.

What I have said, let me once again repeat, has obviously no bearing on prudent scientific enquiry. Indiscriminate condemnation and ignorant credulity are, in truth, the two most dangerous elements with which the public are confronted in connection with Spiritualism. The explorer speedily discovers that both are out of place, and in the ardour of the search — unless properly equipped and guided by the lumen siccum of the scientific spirit — is likely to become engulfed in a Serbonian bog, even if no worse fate befall him.

It is because I feel that in the fearless pursuit of truth it is the paramount duty of science to lead the way, and erect such signposts as may be needed in the vast territory we dimly see before us, that I so strongly deprecate the past and the present scornful attitude of many in the scientific world. Furthermore, as a famous philosopher has remarked of cognate facts, ''The phenomena under discussion are, at least from a philosophical standpoint, of all facts presented to us by the whole of experience, without comparison the most important; it is, therefore, the duty of every learned man to make himself thoroughly acquainted with them."

1 Schopenhauer; who is here speaking of mesmerism and clairvoyance, but his observation applies still more emphatically to the phenomena of Spiritualism. The passage is from the "Versucht iiber Geistersehen," and is quoted in Du Prel's "Philosophy of Mygticism."



Chapter XX. Cautions and Suggestions

"How pure of heart and sound in head, With what divine affections bold Should be the man whose thought would hold An hour's communion with the dead."

— In Memoriam, xciv.

Before bringing this book to a close, it is desirable we should consider what weight can fairiy be claimed for the argument often urged by candid friends, that the dangers of psychical enquiry more than counterbalance its possible usefulness.

I do not deny that there are some risks (in what branch of novel enquiry are there not risks?), but they have been greatly exaggerated, and those who know least of the whole subject are apt to magnify the dangers most. As a leading weekly Journal has recently said: —

"In any case it is right and reasonable to investigate the phenomena, or alleged phenomena, as long as they are investigated in a scientific spirit. No one proposes to stop chemical enquiry because foolish people may poison themselves or blow themselves up. Similarly, provided the dangers are understood, psychic investigation ought not to be forbidden or hindered merely because certain psychological and moral risks attach thereto."

Public performances of mesmerism by travelling showmen ought to be prohibited by law, in the same way as public performances of the effects of chloroform by a quack doctor should be, and would be, prohibited. But experiments in thought-transference, to say the least, are entirely harmless, so far as my knowledge goes, and I speak with some authority on this matter.

All scientific investigations need to be conducted with prudence and common sense, and when these are exercised in psychical research there is no reason to apprehend any dangers, such as may undoubtedly befall those who, with ignorant and unbalanced minds, and from idle curiosity, venture to rush into a region which may prove to them a treacherous psychical quicksand.

Certain precautions in the investigation of

"Spectator, Nov. 18, 1916.

2 It is amusing to hear how often timid and uninstructed friends have said to me that they were sure strange psychical phenomena were "the work of the devil or else electricity"; either or both of these mysterious agencies being, to many persons, the probable cause of all novel and otherwise inexplicable disturbances.

spiritualistic phenomena are however necessary and it may be useful to set them forth. First and foremost as regards those taking part in a seance for physical phenomena, or in the more familiar sittings for automatic writing, trance speaking, or clairvoyance, let me quote the words of that wise and experienced spiritualist Mr. Epes Sargent, who long ago wrote as follows: —

"The circumstance that scientific persons have, as a general rule, kept aloof from the whole of this subject, partly through a misgiving as to their ability to cope with it, and partly through their own a priori objections and rooted prejudices, has left it largely in the hands of those who, from defective training or from a lack of the critical faculty, have supposed that all which may come from the unseen world must be authoritative and right. Messages that violate all the laws of logic and common-sense have thus been accepted as bona fide communications from the world's great departed thinkers."

This was written some years ago but to-day it cannot be said that spiritualists are as a body so uncritical as they once were. I have been invited to address their large gatherings and found them as intelligent and anxious to arrive at the truth as any other body of English men and women. What has struck

1 "The Scientific Basis of Spiritualism," by Epes Sargent, p, 34X, me most forcibly is the spirit of fellowship and freedom of opinion to be found amongst them, and the reverent tone of their devotional meetings. Doubtless the inexperienced are often credulous and too ready to accept the messages given by automatic writing or trance speaking at their face value.

As regards the general and uninstructed public, it is obvious that these phenomena, and the type of alleged clairvoyance described on p. 237, lend themselves to gross abuse by those charlatans and rogues who prey upon the credulity or the distress of mankind. This is one of the misfortunes of the whole subject, and has so largely discredited it. Silly and credulous folk listen and pay for the rubbish that is told them by would-be astrologers, fortune tellers, crystal-gazers, et hoc genus omne. There are genuine cases of clairvoyance in the incipent hypnosis induced by crystal-vision, as Mr. Andrew Lang and others have shown; and there are genuine cases of prevision or precognition of events, as Mr. Myers has demonstrated, just as there are veridical dreams and premonitions. But these genuine cases are exceptional and rarely to be found in a certain class of advertising mediums who swindle the public.

1 See on all these subjects the "Proceedings of the S.P.R.," or Myers' "Human Personality," Chapters VI and IX.

Anyone who possesses genuine psychic power has of course a perfect right to be remunerated, when his or her time is occupied by the exercise of that power. There are, I am sure, many honorable and gifted professional mediums, far removed from the charlatans referred to in the last paragraph. The mischief largely arises when the ignorant public go to such honest psychics and expect an immediate return for their money. The natural tendency of the medium is not to disappoint the sitter, and the temptation therefore arises to supplement genuine by spurious phenomena. It cannot be too often insisted on that super-normal gifts are rare and elusive, and require patience, knowledge and discrimination on the part of the enquirer.

It is for this reason that I should rather dissuade than encourage uninstructed persons to resort to professional mediums. Even those who yearn to pierce the veil for ''The touch of a vanished hand and the sound of a voice that is still," would in my opinion, if they have not Christian faith, do better to rest content with a perusal of the evidence for survival that is now being accumulated by rigorous and laborious expert enquiry.

It is easier to give than to follow such advice, and some mourners have, after a time, found in quiet, continuous, private sittings with one or two friends, the assurance they longed to obtain. If they are not thereby led to neglect the paramount duties of their life and work and if they preserve a sane and wholesome judgment no harm can result.

In a previous chapter I have referred to one of the most provoking things in these communications, the not infrequent personation of great names in history. The absurdity is so transparent that only the ignorant are misled, but, even with perfectly honest psychics, these freaks of the subliminal self often add to the perplexity of the enquirer and to the contempt of the scoffer. A century before modern Spiritualism arose Swedenborg uttered warnings on the delusive character of many of the communications from "spirits." In the "Arcana Caelestia" he says: —

"When spirits begin to speak with man they con*join themselves with his thoughts and affections; hence it is manifest none other but similar spirits speak with man and operate upon him.... They put on all things of his memory, thus all things which the man has learned and imbibed from infancy the spirits suppose these things to be their own; thus they act, as it were, a part of man with men." [This we should now call the emergence of the sub-conscious self of the psychic] "Wherefore let those who speak

1 "Arcana Caelestia," §§ 6192 and 5850.

with spirits beware lest they be deceived, when they say that they are those whom they know or pretend to be."

And so Preiswerk, in a German work published in 1856, giving an account of Spiritualism among the Swiss, says it was found ''that the communications by table rapping were only an echo and reflection of the mind of the persons engaged." This, as we know, is frequently the case, and indicates that the source of some of the "physical phenomena" may also be the unconscious self of the medium, as I have already suggested.

Very often, I think, we are apt to judge the medium too harshly. We must remember the abnormal condition and loss of normal self-control involved in mediumship, and surely it would be as unjust to charge a deeply-entranced medium with conscious fraud as to accuse a somnambulist walking on a housetop with consciously jeopardising his life. It is this weakening of self-control and personal responsibility, on the part of a medium, that constitutes, in my opinion, the chief peril of Spiritualism. Hence the steps of a novice need to be taken with care; even

1 "Spiritual Diary," §§ 1622, 2686, et seg. Cf. also "Apocalypse Explained," §1182.

2 Delitzsch, "Biblical Psychology," p. 369.

the level-headed should walk warily, and the excitable and emotional should have nothing to do with it; for the fascination of the subject is like a candle to moths, it attracts and burns the silly, the credulous, and the crazy.

Every Spiritualist knows the mischief of promiscuous sittings of ignorant people, and many feel as strongly as I do that paid professional mediums who have been convicted of fraud should be sedulously avoided. Dark seances are also undesirable and should be discouraged. The best sittings I ever had have been in full light; so with Sir W. Crookes' wonderful observations. In fact. Home, I believe, always refused to sit in the dark: and probably with any medium, by patience and perseverance, the light could be gradually increased without serious injury to the results, and with enormous gain to the accuracy and precision of the observations.

Spiritualism has sometimes been accused of creating insanity and fostering immorality. No reliable evidence in support of such sweeping charges has ever been adduced, and unsupported accusations of a similar character are familiar in the history of nearly every new and disturbing phase of thought. Isolated cases, no doubt, exist; but, as Mrs. Henry Sidgwick points out in an article in the "Encyclopaedia Britannica," "the fact that the delusions of the insane not infrequently take the form of converse with invisible beings" has probably led to this widespread and mistaken inference.

Passing on to other effects produced on the medium, I doubt if any harm has ever resulted from sittings for automatic writing or speaking, in the normal or trance condition. But there is certainly some evidence indicating that continual sittings for physical phenomena cause an illegitimate and excessive drain on the vitality of a medium, creating a nervous exhaustion which is apt to lead, in extreme cases, to mental derangement, or to an habitual resort to stimulants with a no less deplorable end. If this be the fact we must, of course, be on our guard, as no gain to science would ever justify experiment heedless of a risk so great; but on this point we want more knowledge. Sometimes D. D. Home suffered severely after a long series of seances. Sir W. Crookes states Home was prostrated after some experiments, "pale, speechless and almost fainting he lay upon the floor; showing what a drain on his vital powers was caused by the evolution of the 'psychic force.' "

As regards the impression made on the general public by such phenomena, Mr. C. C. Massey, whose intimate acquaintance with the whole subject I have already referred to, wrote to me in 1895 as follows: —

"Much of the opposition to phenomenal spiritualism (so-called) arises from disgust of the grotesque incongruity between spiritual mysteries and the vulgar manifestations of which the world chiefly hears in connection with this subject."

Everyone outside a lunatic asylum, at least every reverent person, must revolt from the nightmare of a spiritual realm peopled by the quasi ticket-of-leave ghosts so often met with in these manifestations. Compare such buffoonery with our cherished ideals as expressed by Archbishop Trench: —

"Where thou hast touched, O wondrous death, Where thou hast come between, Lo! there for ever perisheth The common and the mean."

Well-informed and experienced Spiritualists say that serious risk to the health, both of mind and body, of the medium sitting for physical manifestationSj is incurred by any sudden light or violent awakening of the medium from the state of trance. To a scoffing public this plea seems obviously invented to secure immunity from detection of the medium by a sudden seizure in a dark sitting. But the sniffs and scoffs of the ignorant do not advance our knowledge; what we want to know — is there any conclusive evidence one way or the other on this point? We need experienced and unprejudiced physicians to decide this question. Whatever the conclusion might be, it is really absurd to suppose that the resources of science are so far exhausted that highly-trained investigators cannot determine, with reasonable precision, whether certain physical movements or appearances are due to a known or an unknown cause, without resort to the aid of clumsy and possibly hazardous police expedients.

It certainly appears to be the fact that the best and most conclusive physical manifestations occur when the investigator treats the phenomena as if they were produced by a timid animal, a sensitive living thing, that will shrink into obscurity and disappear at a sudden disturbance or surprise of any kind, often by a mental as well as material shock. Imagine you are watching the unfolding of a rare and highly organised polyp, and observing the capricious movements of its long and sensitive tentacles, and you will be able to realise how a shock or even a sudden ray of light may startle it to instant closure, though it may by training be accustomed to unfold in full and steady light.

In concluding this chapter it may be well to consider briefly what are the best conditions for obtaining evidence in sittings with good psychics. There can be no doubt that suspicion is fatal to success: sympathy, combined with critical faculty, is essential. The relation of faith to psychical research has been well expressed by the late Mr. C. C. Massey and Mr. Stainton Moses. 'Taith," Mr. Massey says, "is the condition of evidence, the key to the gate of the invisible world." In reference to this Mr. Moses remarks: —

"What Mr. Massey calls 'faith' is a predisposition and attention, a sympathetic state of mind which establishes between an observer and a medium a rapport without which no results are to be had that are worth the having. So when the dispassionate critic makes a merit of the absence of prejudice in his mind he does well. It is conceivable that this negative side may render him harmless; it may even enable him to get personal experience under exceptionally favourable circumstances. But, it may be, as Mr. Massey well points out, 'that this negative qualification is not enough, and... there is need of a positive sympathy' before any real progress can be made."

It is useless for the sceptic to say we do not require "sympathy" when we are testing the evidence for some novel physical or chemical discovery. No, they are dealing with the world of matter and must conduct their experiments in such a way that prejudicial effects in their domain do not vitiate the results. But here we are dealing with delicate psychical conditions and must ascertain what are the favourable or unfavourable conditions for success in that region. Mr. Moses goes on to say: —

"If a man goes to a medium with the strongest desire to witness phenomena, but bringing with him the deterrent attitude of mind which is the antipodes of faith, he will most probably fail, unless he is fortunate enough to meet with a fully-developed psychic whom his coldness cannot wholly chill." "I should say," Mr. Massey remarks, "that the most unfavourable disposition to take to a medium is suspicion, and the most favourable is confidence. But this is to deliver oneself over a prey to the deceiver! Yes, such men do get taken in," I agree with Mr. Massey; they do. I also agree with him when he adds, "I believe that their success will be, on the whole, of such an amount and character as more than to compensate for these disadvantages."

Confidence is certainly misplaced when you are sitting with a doubtful or fraudulent medium, and in any case it must not be regarded as synonymous with credulity. It is the most experienced investigator who is the least credulous, and it is also unquestionably true that it is those psychical researchers who bristle with suspicion, that have never been able to obtain conclusive evidence of the physical phenomena of spiritualism. They

">■ Light, Oct. 23, 1886.

are not abler or more critical investigators than Sir W. Crookes and other scientific men, who have had overwhelming proofs, but they bring with them a psychical atmosphere that is as unfavourable to success as a damp atmosphere is to the working of a f rictional or Holtz electrical machine.

It was said of old "In quietness and confidence shall be your strength," and this attitude of mind, combined with alert observation and unwearied patience, we commend to the psychical researcher who wishes to obtain the best results.



Part VI



Chapter XXI. The Lesson of Philosophy in the Interpretation of Nature

"By that I know the learned lord you are! What you don't touch, is lying leagues afar; What you don't grasp, is wholly lost to you; What you don't reckon, think you, can't be true; What you don't weigh, it has no weight, alas What you don't coin, you're sure it will not pass!"

In an early chapter (III.) we discussed the objections raised by science and religion to spiritualistic phenomena and briefly referred to the fact that one reason which has prevented the general recognition of these phenomena, is because modern science, or rather the dominant school of scientific thought, is, or perhaps was, essentially materialistic. This school, as Mr. F. W. H.

1 Bayard Taylor's translation of "Goethe's Faust," Part II, p. x8.

Myers has eloquently said, "insists, in tones louder sometimes and more combative than the passionless air of science is willing to echo or convey, that all enquiries into man's psychical nature, all enquiries which regard him as possibly more than a portion of organised matter, are no longer open, but closed, and closed against his aspirations for ever." The materialist is imprisoned within the limits of his senses; hence a world which has no continuous relation with his senses has no existence for him. Life without ponderable matter he confidently asserts is impossible, and he prophesies that the atoms of such matter contain within themselves, as Dr. Tyndall asserted in his British Association address, "the promise and potency of every form and quality of life."

Science having done so much for human thought and life, public opinion naturally inclined to the view held by a recent school of scientific thought, which denies the possibility of any life without protoplasm, i.e., a particular grouping of the molecules of matter which forms the basis of all earthly life. Many of our leading physicists have however dissociated themselves from this habit of thought. So long ago as 1881, that eminent man Professor Balfour Stewart, who has long

1 "Fragments of Science," Vol. II, p. 210.

since passed into the unseen, wrote to me as follows: —

"It seems quite clear that the scientific recognition of the unseen, is the point wanting in the intellectual teaching of our race, and I do not doubt that this will be provided for."

His confidence seems to have been abundantly justified, for the psychological climate of to-day is distinctly more favourable to psychical research. Physicists no longer believe in the Lucretian atom "strong in solid singleness," but are pushing the ultimate nature of matter into the realm of the incomprehensible and intangible ether. The mechanistic theory of the universe, which so delights the German mind, is breaking down. The confident and complacent assumptions of materialism have it is true long been impugned by philosophy. In fact —

"The common supposition that the material universe and the conscious beings around us are directly and indubitably known, and constitute a world of 'positive' facts, on which reason can certainly pronounce without any exercise of faith... is an entire mistake, based upon astonishing ignorance of the essential limitations of human knowledge, of which thinkers who lived in the very dawn of philosophy were perfectly aware. The fact is, we are equally obliged to transcend phenomena, and to put faith in events and powers and realities which do not appear when we recognise the past, or the distant, or the material universe, or the minds of men, as when we infer the existence of God and of the unseen world. "

Matter, the world outside our consciousness, is the mystery to be explained; for we only know matter in terms of consciousness, hence we can never find in matter an intelligible explanation of mind and will. A mechanistic theory of the universe reduces consciousness to a mere by-product of matter, and volition to an illusion of the mind.

And if science replies to this that the premises on which it rests are furnished by immediate experience in the shape of observation and experiment —

"What are we to say about these same experiences when we discover, not only that they may be wholly false, but that they are never wholly true;... ninetenths of our immediate experiences of objects are visual, and all visual experiences, without exception, are, according to science, erroneous."

that is to say, the degrees of brightness, form, or colour whereby we perceive objects are, as optics teaches, not properties of the things seen but sensations produced in us by undulations in the ether. Hence, psychologically

1 "The Realistic Assumptions of Modern Science Examined," by Professor Herbert, M.A., p. 455.

2 "The Foundations of Belief," by the Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.

regarded, it may be said, as Mr. Balfour goes on to remark, that —

"Our perceptions, regarded as sources of information, are not merely occasionally inaccurate but habitually mendacious."

For instance, every stimulus given to the optic nerve, whether by light, or pressure, or electricity, or a chemical reagent, reveals itself as a flash of light and is so called by us. The same may be said, mutatis mutandis, of the other specialised sense organs.

Again, how different would be our concept of the external world if we were deprived of some of our senses, such for example as sight or touch; and again how different if we had other gateways of sense, profounder avenues to a knowledge of the world outside ourselves. If we were restricted to a single sense, such as sight, we should infer all phenomena, all material things, to consist of variations in luminosity or colour. Hence our ideas of the world would expand or contract in proportion to the extent of the means by which that world is perceived.

It is our ignorance, or our forgetfulness, of these facts, our neglect of the vast difference between our perceptions and the realities for

1 "The Foundations of Belief," page iii.

which they stand, that gives rise to many of the perplexities we encounter, and some of the conflicts between science and faith. This is worth a moment's further consideration by those who have not considered the subject.

The first lesson taught by mental philosophy is that all we know of external objects and material phenomena are certain sensations within us, as already remarked; of the things-in-themselves we know absolutely nothing. The things we do know are certain states of consciousness, certain symbols — or tekmeria, as the late Dr. Johnstone Stoney, F.R.S., proposed to call them — signs evoked in our mind by events happening in the universe outside our mind. Accordingly we do not perceive the actual material world, nor anything like it, and have not, therefore, the remotest idea of what the thing we call matter is in itself.

We can watch the movements of a telegraphic needle and learn to read the message it brings, but the moving needle does not enable us to perceive the operator at the other end who is causing it to move, nor does it even remotely resemble the operator; its

1 See a suggestive paper by Dr. Stoney In the "Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society," Vol. VI, p. 475.

signals give us, it is true, an intelligible message, but it is intelligible only because the intelligence of the operator has been and is related to our intelligence. In like manner the mental signs of our brain and nervous mechanism give us of the material world outside are not the things, nor a resemblance to the things, in themselves; the real world around us, the world of ontology, is absolutely inaccessible to us. But the reason why the material world is intelligible, why we can interpret the signs it gives us, is because there is an Intelligence behind the universe which has been and is related to our intelligence.

To the pure materialist the universe is self-sustained and has no deeper meaning than the appearance it presents to our senses; these appearances are to him the ultimate reality. If he forms a mechanical theory of nature by endowing atoms with some occult power, or consciousness, he confers on them the very properties which have to be explained. Hence We are driven to believe in a Supreme Intelligence and to regard the universe as the expression of the Divine Thought perpetually sustained by the Divine Will. This is surely the simplest and truest interpretation of nature.

There are few more honoured names in science than that of Sir John Herschel, and in this connection a passage from one of his essays appears to me so valuable a contribution to our belief in a Supreme Mind that I venture to quote it. The whole essay, like all Sir John wrote, is full of luminous thought.

"The universe presents us with an assemblage of phenomena — physical, vital, and intellectual — the connecting link between the worlds of intellect and matter being that of organised vitality, occupying the whole domain of animal and vegetable life, throughout which, in some way inscrutable to us, movements among the molecules of matter are originated of such a character as apparently to bring them under the control of an agency other than physical superseding the ordinary laws which regulate the movements of inanimate matter, or, in other words, giving rise to movements which would not result from the action of those laws uninterfered with; and therefore implying, on the very same principle, the origination of force.

"The first and greatest question which Philosophy has to resolve in its attempts to make out a Cosmos — to bring the whole of the phenomena exhibited in these three domains of existence under the contemplation of the mind as a congruous whole — is, whether we can derive any light from our internal consciousness of thought, reason, power, will, motive, design, or not; whether, that is to say. Nature is or is not more interpretable by supposing these things (be they what they may) to have had, or to have, to do with its arrangements.

"Constituted as the human mind is, if Nature be not interpretable through these conceptions it is not interpretable at all; and the only reason we can have for troubling ourselves about it is either the utilitarian one of bettering our condition by 'subduing Nature' to our use, through a more complete understanding of its 'laws,' so as to throw ourselves into its grooves, and thereby reach our ends more readily and effectually; or the satisfaction of that sort of aimless curiosity which can find its gratification in scrutinising everything and comprehending nothing. But if these attributes of mind are not consentaneous, they are useless in the way of explanation. Will without motive, power without reason, thought opposed to reason, would be admirable in explaining a chaos, but would render little aid in accounting for anything else."

It was formerly so integral a part of modern scientific thought to regard mind and matter as distinct entities that we forget this common dualistic conception may be an entirely fallacious idea. Just as language is a manifestation of thought and indissolubly connected with it, so matter may be only a manifestation to us of spirit. To human intelligence, spirit is always manifested through matter; so that spirit and matter, like force and matter, or thought and language, seem to us inseverable and even unthinkable apart. The essential unity which underlies thought and its expression in language affords an

1 "On the Origin of Force," p. 473. "Lectures on Scientific Subjects," by Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Bart., D.C.L., F.R.S., etc.

interesting analogy to spirit and matter. As a suggestive writer has remarked —

"Language is the mode in which thought takes shape, its way of becoming known to itself, and therefore dependent on thought for existence, but their relationship is a far more intimate one than that of cause and effect.... We cannot 'account for' thought by the laws of language, simply because thought unconsciously makes those laws by way of attaining to a clearer recognition of itself. In the same way we cannot 'account for' mind by the laws of matter, because those laws are, in reality, the principles according to which human intelligence apprehends the material universe. In them, mind recognises itself in the external world. As thought is essentially self-manifesting so the life of the spirit is essentially self-manifesting, hence as language is the utterance of the one so matter is the utterance of the other."

Experimental science is still young and has not wholly emerged from the Cartesian stage of thought where matter and mind, nature and spirit are absolute opposites, their antagonism reconciled only in the Divine incomprehensible Will. As our knowledge progresses and our interpretation of nature becomes more adequate, we begin to recognise

1 "Progressive Revelation," Chap. V, by Miss Caillard; see also my brochure entitled "Creative Thought," published by Watkins, Cecil Court, London, W.C.

that the dualism and antithesis of nature and spirit disappear, and miracles as well as all super-normal phenomena become less incredible, when nature is seen to be, as Novalis said, "an illuminated table of the contents of the spirit."



Chapter XXII. The Mystery of Human Personality

"One Life through all the immense creation runs, One Spirit is the moon's, the sea's, the sun's; All forms in the air that fly, on the earth that creep, And the unknown nameless monsters of the deep — Each breathing thing obeys one Mind's control, And in all substance is a single Soul."

—Virgil'-

A BRIEF consideration of some aspects of human personality was necessary in an earlier portion of this book. It may not be out of place in conclusion to note some of the higher aspects of this subject. We have seen that our personality is a very complex and mysterious thing. Probably in each of us, certainly in many, there are potentialities which far outstrip the capabilities of our conscious voluntary intelligence; nay more, which transcend the limitations of our senses, of space, of time, and even of our thought and consciousness. But if these super-normal

1 Book VI of the "-neid," translated by Mr, Myers.

faculties exist — and of their existence such acute thinkers as Schopenhauer and E. von Hartmann were convinced — other manifestations of them than those we are acquainted with in spiritualism, somnambulism, hypnotic trance, etc., might be expected.

The dark continent within us, is in fact much more than a hidden record of unheeded or forgotten past impressions; there is an ultra-WmindX as well as a 5w^-liminal self; something that has higher perceptive powers than our normal consciousness, something in us that is able to respond to directed thought, whether the thinker be 'in the body or out of the body," something that links our individual life to the Source of that life, and to the ocean of universal life. This was firmly believed by that great philosopher, Kant, who, anticipating our present knowledge, slight as that is, was led by the mere strength of his penetrating intellect to assert:

It is therefore, as good as proved... that the human soul, even in this life, stands in indissoluble community viith all immaterial natures of the spirit

1 Mr. Myers has used the word supra-liminal to connote our conscious waking life, but this might perhaps more appropriately be called cis-liminal, within the threshold of consciousness: I have used the world ultra-liminal to signify the higher transcendental self. The great work on "Human Personality" by Mr. Myers (which was published long after this chapter was written in the original edition of this book) should be read by all who wish a fuller knowledge of the subject.

world, that it mutually acts upon them and receives from them impressions, of which, however, as man, it is unconscious, as long as all goes well.

And again he says: —

It is, therefore, truly one and the same subject which belongs at the same time to the visible and to the invisible world, but (since representations of the one world are not associated with ideas of the other) what I think as spirit is not remembered by me as man.

This was also Swedenborg's view. He repeatedly states: —

Man is so constituted that he Is at the same time in the spiritual world and in the natural world: the spiritual world is where the angels are, and the natural world is where men are.

Plotinus, who lived in the third century, also held a very similar belief, speaking of men as "amphibia," who live partly in the

