ON THE THRESHOLD OF THE UNSEEN

by W. F. Barrett (1844-1925)

Basis: Clean reading edition of W. F. Barrett's On the Threshold of the Unseen (New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1917; Internet Archive onthresholdofuns00barr); spelling and wording original; running headers, page numbers and scanner noise removed.

Reader note: The dowsing rod and the pendule explorateur are treated practically in Appendix D (2), "The Dowsing Rod and the Pendule Explorateur" (p. 321 in the 1917 pagination), where Barrett gives the forked rod and the thread pendulum alike to involuntary muscular action except where a good dowser’s clairvoyance supervenes; the good dowser is touched on again in Chapter XVIII, "Clairvoyance: Psychology of Trance Phenomena," and autoscopes including the dowsing rod in Chapter X, "The Problem of Mediumship." There is no separate dowsing chapter in this book (Barrett’s dowsing chapter is Chapter XII of his Psychical Research, 1911, in this series).

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

ON THE THRESHOLD OF THE UNSEEN

AN EXAMINATION OF THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUALISM AND OF THE EVIDENCE FOR SURVIVAL AFTER DEATH

BY SIR WILLIAM F. BARRETT, F.R.S.

With an Introduction by JAMES H. HYSLOP, Ph.D., LL.D.

Secretary of the American Society for Psychical Research

"Men are wont to guess about new subjects from those they are already acquainted with, and the hasty and vitiated fancies they have thence formed: than which there cannot be a more fallacious mode of reasoning." — Bacon "Novum Organum" Bk. i, par. cix.

NEW YORK

E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY

681 Fifth Avenue

First printing, November, 1917

Second printing, May, 1918

Third printing, June, 1919

Printed in the United States of America



Dedication

TO THE DEAR MEMORY OF ONE WHOSE RADIANT FAITH GAVE HER "THE ASSURANCE OF THINGS HOPED FOR" AND NEEDED NOT THE EVIDENCE OF THINGS UNSEEN WHICH THIS BOOK MAY POSSIBLY GIVE TO SOME STRICKEN SOULS AND OTHER SEEKERS AFTER TRUTH.



Preface

"A mind unwilling to believe, or even undesirous to be instructed, our weightiest evidence must ever fail to impress. It will insist on taking the evidence in bits and rejecting item by item. The man who announces his intention of waiting until a single absolutely conclusive bit of evidence turns up, is really a man not open to conviction, and if he be a logician he knows it. For modern logic has made it plain that single facts can never be 'proved' except by their coherence in a system. But as all the facts come singly anyone who dismisses them one by one is destroying the conditions under which the conviction of new truth could ever arise In his mind."*

During the greater part of the last century, and that which preceded it, the learned world as a whole treated with scorn and contempt all those obscure psychical phenomena which lie between the territory already conquered by science and the dark realms of Ignorance and superstition. Many causes have in recent years contributed to lessen this aversion, which is not only passing away but giving place to an earnest desire to know what trustworthy evidence exists on behalf of super-normal, — often, but erroneously, called super-natural, — phenomena.

Although many eminent scientific men In the past and present generation, both in England and abroad, have testified to the genuineness and importance of these phenomena official science still stands aloof. This no doubt is largely due to the essential difference between physical and psychical phenomena, a difference by no means clearly

* Dr. F, C. S. Schiller, "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research," Vol. XVIII, p. 419.

recognized and which can never be broken down. The main object of physical science is to measure and forecast, and from its phenomena free will must be eliminated. Psychical states on the contrary can neither be measured nor forecast, and from them the disturbing influence of life and will can neither be eliminated nor foreseen.

The association of ideas and methods of investigation in physical research are therefore widely different from those in psychical research. Accordingly minds working in the former line of thought become more or less impervious to facts belonging to the other line of thought, however well attested those facts may be. The new association of ideas is foreign and uncongenial and has apparently no harmonious relation to accepted scientific truths. Nevertheless, as I have endeavoured to point out in the introductory chapters, when these differences are realized, and the rapidly accumulating weight of evidence on behalf of phenomena, hitherto unrecognised by official science, is critically and fairly examined, the general acceptance of these phenomena by science can only be a question of time.

That this is likely to be the case is seen from the fact that all enduring additions to our knowledge of the universe rest upon a similar basis. They are the result of prolonged and cautious enquiry, the investigation and discussion of a number of circumstances, each of which by itself may appear to be insignificant, but taken collectively point to some wide generalization. Such evidence though conclusive to a trained observer makes little appeal to the popular mind, which has no time nor inclination to master the necessary details, and asks for some one piece of conclusive evidence, — some "knockdown blow," — to compel its attention and assent. This however cannot be given, — as that acute thinker Dr. F. C. S. Schiller has pointed out in the quotation at the head of this Preface, — and there is nothing for it but a tiresome study of detailed evidence, the strength of which rests on its cumulative character.

In the following pages I have given some of this evidence with as little tedium as possible, and also ventured to touch, perhaps too daringly, upon many subjects which need fuller exposition than was possible in a small volume, the history of which is as follows.

More than twenty years ago an address on the phenomena of spiritualism, which I delivered in London, was expanded into a little book, — the nucleus of the present volume, — entitled "On the Threshold of a New World of Thought." Although an edition of that book was printed off in 1895 its publication was delayed for more than a dozen years for the following reason. Considerable public interest was at that time being taken in a well known Italian medium, Eusapia Paladino; several eminent continental savants, and subsequently a few distinguished members of the Society for Psychical Research, after a searching investigation in 1894, had attested the genuineness of many remarkable phenomena occurring with this medium. Their report was quoted in my former book, but just before it was issued an opposite opinion was arrived at by others, equally competent, after a subsequent investigation in 1895. It seemed wiser therefore to delay the publication of the volume until more conclusive evidence, one way or the other, was forthcoming. Moreover I felt that if Eusapia were really nothing more than a clever and systematic impostor, able to deceive several eminent investigators, both English and foreign, this fact would certainly shake the value of other scientific testimony to the supernormal, and undermine the stability of many of the conclusions reached in my book.

As will be seen by referring to the history of this case, which I have given on pp. 65-67 and in Appendix C of the present work, repeated critical investigation in later years showed that this notorious medium really possessed genuine super-normal power, albeit, like so many professional mediums of a low moral type, she sometimes lapsed into fraudulent practices, which however were quickly detected by trained observers.

Accordingly "On the Threshold of a New World of Thought" was issued in 1908 and the edition quickly sold out. The remarkable series of experiments, carried out by the Society for Psychical Research, on the evidence for survival after death was then in progress and I postponed the publication of a new edition until further trustworthy evidence on this vital question was attainable. This, in my opinion, has now been obtained; my early book was therefore recast, an outline of some of the evidence on survival included, and the present volume is the result. Meanwhile the editors of the Home University Library had asked me to write the volume on "Psychical Research" for their series, and after this was published, various circumstances prevented the completion of this book until the present year. Now, alas, the war has rendered printing and paper a great difficulty for the publishers, to whom my readers will I trust extend their indulgence for any shortcomings in this respect.

It will thus be seen that the conclusions reached in this book are not the result of hasty and superficial examination. Upwards of forty years ago I began the investigation of alleged super-normal phenomena with a perfectly detached and open mind. The urgent need for a Society which should preserve continuity of records of investigation and a high standard of experimental work became apparent, and with the co-operation of one or two friends the Society for Psychical Research was founded early in 1882. Forty-six volumes of its Proceedings and Journal have now been published, and in addition its sister society in America, — which through the assistance of some eminent friends in Boston and Harvard I was enabled to initiate in 1884, — has also published a large library of its Proceedings and Journal, under the indefatigable editorship of Professor Hyslop. Thus a vast collection of sifted evidence is being accumulated and printed, which will be of immense value for future reference and study.

As regards the so-called "physical phenomena" of spiritualism, given in Part 2, bizarre and sometimes repellant as such manifestations are, — and meaningless except as affording illustrations of the operation of some unknown Intelligence and power, — the evidence cited seems to me Indisputable, though some of my readers may hesitate to accept it. A wholesome scepticism is desirable, but to attribute imbecility or hallucination to eminent and cautious scientific Investigators, or fraud to men of high intelligence and probity like the Rev. Stainton Moses ("M.A. Oxon") is simply puerile. Nevertheless, in the British Weekly, the writer of a lengthy review of Sir Oliver Lodge's book "Raymond" expresses amazement that Sir Oliver refers "without a word of caution to the record of Stainton Moses." He justifies this stricture by quoting from the writings of the late Mr. F. Podmore, who did useful work in connection with psychical research, but was chiefly known for his ingenuity in discrediting, or attributing to telepathy, any psychical phenomena outside his limited range of view. Those who, like myself, knew both the Rev. S. Moses and Mr. Podmore would be indignant if the latter attributed wilful deception to the former, but the writer in the British Weekly is mistaken and has no adequate grounds for thinking this was the case. It was necessary to refer to this matter, as the evidence of phenomena associated with Mr. Stainton Moses, which I have quoted in Part 2, might otherwise be regarded with suspicion by those who do not know the facts.

In selecting some illustrations from the growing mass of trustworthy evidence on behalf of survival after death, given in Part 4, it will be noticed that I have refrained from citing any such evidence obtained through paid professional mediums, who are naturally regarded by the public with more or less distrust. Nor can the love of notoriety, or other inducement to deceive, be brought against those through whom the evidence for survival given in this book has come.

The question has naturally and often been asked, — if communication with those who have passed into the unseen be possible, why should it be necessary to have a connecting link in a so-called medium, usually a perfect stranger and of another order of mind? Surely our loved ones who have recently entered the spiritual world would try tc communicate directly with those dearest to them! a father or mother would be more likely to be sensitive to the spiritual presence of their beloved child than an uncongenial stranger. This question I have discussed In Chapter X., and would also beg my readers to refer to the Cautions and Suggestions given in Chapter XX.

Those who like St. Thomas cannot believe in survival after bodily death, without some material demonstration, will probably find in continued sittings with one or two friends. In the manner described in Appendix D, a response to their yearnings and an aid to their faith. Having attained this assurance I do not advise them to pursue the matter further, but rather learn more of the spiritual world and spiritual communion from the Christian mystics of all countries; especially would I commend a book by the late Mr. J. H. Spalding, where the teaching of that gifted seer Swedenborg Is luminously and dispassionately set forth.

None will find in automatic writing, or other

Anyone wishing to make experiments on, and a study of, automatic writing, are advised to read the late Mrs. Verrall'S account of her own experience and method given in the "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research," Vol. XX, and abo Mr. Myers' paper in Vol. IV, p. 209, etc.

2 "The Kingdom of Heaven," by J- H. Spalding (Dent & Co., 3/6 net; my little book on "Swedenborg" (J. H. Watkins, i/net), may also interest the reader.

spintuallstic phenomena, the channel for the "communion of saints," which is independent of material agency and attained only in stillness and serenity of soul. For the psychical order is not the spiritual order; it deals, as I have said elsewhere, only "with the external, though it be in an unseen world; and its chief value lies in the fulfilment of its work whereby it reveals to us the inadequacy of the external, either here or hereafter, to satisfy the life of the soul."

The paramount importance of psychical research is found in correcting the habit of Western thought, — of the average men we meet, — that the physical plane is the whole of Nature, or at any rate the only aspect of the universe which really concerns us. Under this false and deadly assumption all wider views and spiritual conceptions wither and die as soon as they are born. This vast and devasting war has, however, brought certain spiritual tendencies and aspirations into the lives of a multitude of men and led many to the conviction, which Lowell expresses, that —

"We see but half the causes of our deeds, Seeking them wholly in the outer life, And heedless of the encircling spirit world. Which though unseen, is felt, and sows in us All germs of pure and world-wide purposes."

My warmest thanks are due to my friend the Rev. M. A. Bayfield, M.A. for kindly reading the proof sheets of this book and for many valuable suggestions. 31 Devonshire Place,

London, W. March, 1917.



Contents

- Preface — vii

- Introduction by James H. Hyslop — xvii

- Part I

- I. Introduction — 1

- II. Psychical Research and Public Opinion — 15

- III. Conflicting Objections of Science and Religion — 25

- Part II

- IV. The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism — 35

- V. Physical Phenomena Continued — 51

- VI. Levitation and Impunity to Fire — 69

- VII. On Certain More Disputable Phenomena of Spiritualism: Ectoplasms; Direct Voice and Writing; Materialization; Spirit Photography; The Aura — 81

- Part III

- VIII. The Canons of Evidence in Psychical Research — 95

- IX. Theories — 103

- X. The Problem of Mediumship — 113

- XI. Human Personality: The Subliminal Self — 127

- Part IV

- XII. Apparitions — 140

- XIII. Automatic Writing: The Evidence for Identity — 161

- XIV. Proof of Super-normal Messages: The Ouija Board — 176

- XV. Further Evidence of Survival After Death — 190

- XVI. Evidence of Identity in the Discarnate — 207

- XVII. Evidence from Abroad of Survival — 222

- Part V

- XVIII. Clairvoyance: Psychology of Trance Phenomena — 235

- XIX. Difficulties and Objections Considered — 246

- XX. Cautions and Suggestions — 253

- Part VI

- XXI. The Lesson of Philosophy in the Interpretation of Nature — 267

- XXII. The Mystery of Human Personality — 278

- XXIII. The Divine Ground of the Soul: Re-incarnation — 284

- XXIV. Telepathy and Its Implications — 292

- Appendix A. Superstition and the Supernatural: Miracles — 301

- Appendix B. Note by Prof. Balfour Stewart, LL.D., F.R.S. — 308

- Appendix C. Eusapia Paladino — 312

- Appendix D. Suggestions for Investigators in Conducting Psychical Experiments — 319

- Index [not reproduced in this reading edition; see NOTES.md] — 327



Introduction by James H. Hyslop

I FEEL that it is somewhat presumptuous on my part to introduce a work by Sir William Barrett to the American public. He should be well enough known in this country to make an introduction by a much less qualified person unnecessary. But if it will help any one to read his book I shall gladly send it on the mission for which it was written. Sir William Barrett was for many years Professor of Experimental Physics in the Royal College of Science for Ireland, and also spent many years investigating psychic phenomena, having worked in the subject long before the English Society for Psychical Research was organized. Hence this work is the ripe fruit of many years of investigation. It is the best work of the kind that has ever appeared in English and readers may study it without offense at either its data or its manner. It is thoroughly scientific in method and spirit, and practices no evasions or subterfuges in the discussion of its problems. The manner is calm and tolerant of scepticism, perhaps because the author came to the subject as a sceptic himself, and zvii he selects all his facts with reference to the objections which sceptics and believers in other theories than the spiritualistic one would bring forward. The author faces issues boldly and makes no concessions to mere respectability, though not attacking or shunning it. In many writers there is fear of compromising one's standing by telling the truth.; There is nothing of the kind in this book, and that characteristic makes it refreshingly frank and clear. Every aspect and difficulty of the subject is canvassed and evidence produced for the claims made in the book. Readers cannot fail to find in it the light they desire on this complicated subject.

James H. Hyslop.

New York,

December 21st, 1917.



Part I



Chapter I. Introduction

"If anyone advances anything new which contradicts, perhaps threatens to overturn, the creed which we have for years repeated, and have handed down to others, all passions are raised against him, and every effort is made to crush him. People resist with all their might; they act as if they neither heard nor could comprehend; they speak of the new view with contempt, as if it were not worth the trouble of even so much as an investigation or a regard, and thus a new truth may wait a long time before it can make its way."

There are many people, and their number is rapidly increasing, who feel, as the late Professor Henry Sidgwick has said, "it is a scandal that the dispute as to the reality of the marvellous phenomena of Spiritualism

"Conversations of Goethe" (Bohn's Library, p. 47). Spiritism is a better term, see p. 9.

should still be going on, — phenomena of which it is quite impossible to exaggerate the scientific importance, if only a tenth part of what has been alleged by generally credible witnesses could be shown to be true." Taking an unprejudiced view of the subject, such persons are anxious to know what amount of truth underlies the alleged facts. To these this little book may be of service.

There are others who, whilst not denying that the subject may possibly be a legitimate object of scientific investigation, prefer to give the whole matter a wide berth; contending either that it is a worthless will-o'-the-wisp, luring its victims, by an imaginary prospect of knowledge, into a miserable morass, or that it is distinctly forbidden by the Scriptures and condemned by the Church, so that its practice, and some would even add its investigation, is unlawful.

On the other hand, the popular habit of thought, whether lay or scientific, regards the whole thing as too contemptible for any inquiry, that it reeks, not of the bottomless pit, but of the dunghill; superstition, fraud, and tomfoolery amply accounting for all the alleged "phenomena." Hence they regard with complacency the many shallow quidnuncs, ever on the look-out for something new, who find in fourth-hand stories of "spooks" abundant material for the entertainment of their friends. In a busy world, occupied with other things — where the fierce struggle for material existence, wealth, and position dominates everything — such a state of mind is very natural. But I have failed to find that a single person who ridicules Spiritualism has given to the subject any serious and patient consideration; moreover, I venture to assert that any fair-minded person who devotes to its careful and dispassionate investigation as many days, or even hours, as some of us have given years, will find it impossible to continue sitting in the seat of the scornful, whatever other position he may take up.

No doubt the popular hesitation in accepting unseen intelligences as a cause of these phenomena arises not so much from inability to explain the modus operandi, but from a preconceived theory that such an explanation is impossible, and perhaps also from the fear of being laughed at as unscientific or superstitious in adopting it.

There are, however, some able thinkers who decline to accept or even investigate these phenomena on the ground that with our limited faculties successful investigation is impossible, and with our present limited knowledge, whatever results are obtained would probably be misinterpreted by us, so that any conclusions drawn as to the super-normal character of the phenomena are worthless, or, at any rate, to be distrusted.

Even those who do not go so far as this, regard psychical research, whether it be telepathy or Spiritualism, as unworthy of serious attention, because the phenomena are either impossible or utterly trivial; therefore in either case a sheer waste of time.

There are some things, I admit, which it would be utter folly to waste our time upon, such as ''circle squaring," or "perpetual motion," &c. These things are beyond the pale of rational investigation at the present day on account of the extent of our knowledge in those particular regions. But there are other things which to-day appear impossible only from the extent of our ignorance in those directions. Such, for example, as, say, the sea serpent, thought-transference, or Spiritualistic phenomena; a few years ago we should also have included the telephone and wireless telegraphy. The essential difference between these two classes of improbable events is that the first involves a contradiction of experience or of laws well established, the second involves an unforeseen extension, but no contradiction, of existing knowledge and experience.

To assert that mind can act upon mind independently of any recognised channel of sense, or that mind can exist associated with an imperceptible form of matter, is a considerable extension of our knowledge, — if true as I believe it to be — but involves no rejection or contradiction of other knowledge equally true. On the other hand, to assert that 2 and 2 makes 5, and also make 4, would involve intellectual confusion; similarly, to believe in materialism, as now understood, and also in these phenomena, would involve a contradiction of thought and consequent intellectual confusion; hence one or the other must be rejected. So that the ''impossibility" that is urged refers, not to the phenomena themselves, but only to certain popular theories or conceptions about those phenomena.

But it is urged that the utterly trivial character of the phenomena renders them too contemptible for serious inquiry. "Even if true, we don't care for the results you obtain," is a common observation. This was doubtless the feeling that prompted the illustrious Faraday to decline any further investigation; for he stated in his well-known letter to Sir Emerson Tennant that he had found in the phenomena "nothing worthy of attention," or capable of supplying "any force or information of the least use or value to mankind." With all deference to one whom I knew and revered so highly, this surely was a wrong

' Pall Mall Gazette, May 19th, 1868. The whole correspondence is given in Light, February and March, 18S8.

position to take up. Long ago Benjamin Franklin, most practical of men, disposed of that argument; but the whole of Faraday's great career showed he valued truth for its own sake, irrespective of any commercial consideration, and supplies the best answer to the words of his I have quoted. Nevertheless, we still find some scientific men of the highest eminence taking precisely the same ground. Thus Professor Huxley replying to Mr. A. R. Wallace, O.M. (who had described some spiritualistic phenomena he had witnessed), said ''It may be all true for anything I know to the contrary, but really I cannot get up any interest in the subject."

Some time ago, in 1894, the distinguished physicist and courageous investigator Sir Oliver Lodge answered such objectors in the columns of the official scientific journal *'Nature," as follows: —

"This attitude of 'not caring' for the results of scientific investigation in unpopular regions, even if those results be true, is very familiar to some of us who are engaged in a quest which both the great leaders in the above-remembered controversy [Lord Kelvin and Professor Huxley] agree to dislike and despise. It is an attitude appropriate to a company of shareholders, it is a common and almost universal sentiment of the noble army of self-styled 'practical men,' but it is an astonishing attitude for an acknowledged man of science, whose whole vocation is the discovery and reception of new truth. Certain obscure facts have been knocking at the door of human intelligence for many centuries, and they are knocking now, in the most scientific era the world has yet seen. It may be that they will have to fall back disappointed for yet another few centuries; it may be that they will succeed this time in effecting a precarious and constricted right of entry; the issue appears to depend upon the attitude of scientific men of the present and near future, and no one outside can help them."

But fifty years ago Professor A. De Morgan, with inimitable satire, had already exposed the unphilosophical and illogical position still taken up on these questions by such honoured leaders of science as Lord Kelvin and Professor Huxley. Nothing more brilliant or amusing has ever been written on the whole subject than De Morgan's preface to his wife's book, "From Matter to Spirit," and I earnestly commend its perusal to the scientific men of to-day. And to those who prefer Bishop Butler to De Morgan for their guide let me quote the following words from the "Analogy"; "After all, that which is true must be admitted; though it should show us the shortness of our faculties, and that we are in no wise judges of many things, of which we are apt to think ourselves very competent ones."

Nevertheless the argument is sometimes heard that if these super-normal psychical phenomena are true they ought to be reproduced and demonstrated at pleasure. This was urged by that eminent physiologist Dr. Carpenter, speaking in reply to my paper at the British Association in 1876, when for the first time evidence on behalf of thought transference and other psychical phenomena was brought before a scientific society. That able publicist Mr. R. H. Hutton in his journal the Spectator showed the absurdity of such an argument, remarking that if it were valid we should have to reject as imaginary many of the psychological and pathological facts given by Dr. Carpenter and other writers on mental physiology. And as the late Professor Henry Sidgwick said, 'T have never seen any serious attempt to justify this refusal [to accept the evidence of rare and fitful phenomena] on general principles of scientific method." We do not know at present all the conditions of success, and it is to be expected they may be sometimes present and sometimes absent. Moreover, whether the phenomena originate in the unconscious self of the medium, or the operation of some unseen intelligence, in neither case can we control the exercise of the will.

Before proceeding further it is desirable to

1 See Spectator iox September 30, 1876.

define the exact meaning of the word Spiritualism. On the Continent this word is often replaced by the term "Spiritism" to distinguish it from the broad sense of the word as used by philosophical writers, to denote a metaphysic opposed to materialism. But the generally accepted sense in which the word is used to-day is defined (i) by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, in the article "Spiritualism," in the last edition of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica," as "a belief that the spiritual world manifests itself by producing in the physical world effects inexplicable by the known laws of nature," or (2) by Dr. A. R. Wallace, in "Chambers' Encyclopaedia," as "the name applied to a great and varied series of abnormal or preter-normal phenomena, purporting to be for the most part caused by spiritual beings," or (3) by a writer in the "Spiritual Magazine," whose definition I curtail, as "a belief based solely on facts open to the world through an extensive system of mediumship, its cardinal truth, established by experiment, being that of a world of spirits, and the continuity of the existence of the individual spirit through the momentary eclipse of death."

These definitions, it will be noticed, are somewhat progressive; the last is doubtless the usual meaning attached to the word by Spiritualists. I see nothing to dissent from in it, and, speaking for myself, I do not hesitate to affirm that a careful and dispassionate review of my own experiments, extending over a period of forty years, together with the investigation of the evidence of competent witnesses, compels my belief in Spiritualism, as so defined.

There can be little doubt that the impatience with which orthodox science regards spiritualism and psychical research in general arises from the difficulty of finding any explanation of the phenomena which is related to existing scientific knowledge. Hence, as Goethe remarked, in one of his conversations quoted at the head of this chapter, "a new truth may wait a long time before it can make its way." My friend the late Mr. C. C. Massey has well pointed out: —

"When we see how a thing can have happened we are much more ready to give a fair hearing to evidence that it has happened, than when the material offered is quite indigestible by our intelligence. And thus an explanatory hypothesis is hardly less necessary for the reception of facts of a certain character, than are facts for the support of a hypothesis."

So also more recently the late Professor

1 Preface to Du Prel's "Philosophy of Mysticism."

William James has said: "It often happens a fact is strenuously denied until a welcome interpretation comes with it, then it is admitted readily enough."

The insistence of the demand for some explanation of these phenomena which we find within us, is only a special case of that "continuous pressure of the causal instinct" which characterises our reason; and it is because of the difficulty of finding any adequate explanation of them in known and familiar causes, that science distrusts the existence of the phenomena themselves. The reasoning faculty, in rejecting every known cause as inadequate, satisfies its unrest by rejecting the occurrences as improbable or unproved. In truth, there is, strictly speaking, no scientific explanation of the higher phenomena of Spiritualism. Secondary causes, with which science deals, are only antecedents or previous states of a phenomenon, and have more remote antecedents or previous states, which, in turn, need to be accounted for, and so on in an endless chain; thus to the scientific materialist God necessarily becomes an infinite et cetera.

With a real or true cause — still less with the ultimate cause of things — science cannot grapple. A real cause, though of limited

1 See on this subject the remarkably suggestive and able work, "Personality, Human and Divine," by the late Canon Illingworth.

range, we find in ourselves, in our personality; and such a cause, perhaps of wider range, we find in the intelligence that lies behind many of the phenomena here discussed. But the operation of unseen intelligences — who, in some unknown manner, can affect us, and also affect material things around us, just as our personality can affect the grey matter of our brain, and through it things outside ourselves — this, although it may be a true cause, is as far beyond scientific explanation as the phenomena of consciousness itself. Until science can explain how consciousness is related to the brain, — which, although a fact of daily experience, is wholly incomprehensible,— we cannot expect from it any explanation as to how discarnate intelligences can operate upon matter, or whence the energy is derived. (See Note at end of chapter.)

But a change of thought on this subject is coming over the educated world. Some of the most cultured minds and acute investigators of recent years have satisfied themselves of the genuineness of the phenomena of Spiritualism, or at least that there is a strong prima facie case for serious investigation, and are profoundly impressed with the issues opened up and the vast movement of thought the general acceptance of these phenomena would create. Some, it is true, desire to suspend their judgment as to the explanation of the facts, whilst a surprisingly large number unreservedly accept the facts as an "assurance of things hoped for, the proving of things not seen." "When we last met," said Holman Hunt to Ruskin, "you declared you had given up all belief in immortality." "I remember well," replied Ruskin, "but what has mainly caused the change in my views is the unanswerable evidence of spiritualism. I know there is much vulgar fraud and stupidity connected with it, but underneath there is, I am sure, enough to convince us that there is personal life independent of the body, but with this once proved, I have no further interest in spiritualism."

Many stricken men and women in this gigantic and devastating war have found similar solace in the dark hours of their bereavement. They have seen in it a ray of heavenly light falling —

"Upon the great world's altar-stairs That slope through darkness up to God."

Note. — There are of course various philosophical theories to account for consciousness and its relation to brain processes; in Chapter X I have briefly referred to this subject. Ultimately, as Dr. W. McDougall, F.R.S., has shown, we are compelled to choose between Materiai-

» "The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood," by Holman Hunt, O.M., Vol. II, p. 271.

ism and Spiritualism, using this latter word in its true metaphysical sense, "the soul theory." This theory involves psycho-physical interaction, and the argument that such interaction is impossible because it is inconceivable, has been answered by Lotze as follows: — "It is easy to show that in the interaction between body and soul there lies no greater riddle than in any other example of causation, and that only the false conceit that we understand something of the one case, excites our astonishment that we understand nothing of the other." I quote this from Dr. McDougall's masterly and well-known work, "Body and Mind." It is a significant fact — although Prof, W. James said some time ago, "Souls have gone out of fashion" (in science and philosophy) — that to-day not only Dr. McDougall, but many other distinguished psychologists and metaphysicians, support che soul theory.



Chapter II. Psychical Research and Public Opinion

"Wherever there is the slightest possibility for the mind of man to know, there is a legitimate problem for science," — Professor Karl Pearson.

It will I think be generally admitted that public opinion has taken a new departure with regard to the large class of important and interesting phenomena which lie on the boundary of an unseen world. We are on the Threshold of a new World of Thought, and the existence of the Society for Psychical Research, with the long list of distinguished men who are members of the Society or have 'given it their cordial support, is of itself a proof that a profound change of thought has taken place in recent years. Among the past presidents of that Society is a former Prime Minister of this country, the Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, who in his presidential address to the Society in 1894 spoke as follows': —

1 "Proceedings Society for Psychical Research," Vol, X, p. 6, et seq. The lapse of time since the foundation of the Society in 1882 has left Mr. Balfour and myself the sole survivors of the original Vice-Presidents of the Society.

"I think the time has now come when it is desirable in their own interests, and in our interests, that the leaders of scientific thought in this country and elsewhere should recognise that there are well attested facts which, though they do not easily fit into the framework of sciences, or of organised experience as they conceive it, yet require investigation and explanation, and which it is the bounden duty of science, if not itself to investigate at all events to assist us in investigating,... All arbitrary limitations of our sphere of work are to be avoided. It is our business to record, to investigate, to classify, and if possible to explain, facts of a far more startling and impressive character than these modest cases of telepathy. Let us not neglect that business.... If many are animated by a wish to get evidence, not through any process of laborious deduction, but by direct observation, of the reality of intelligences not endowed with a physical organisation like our own, I see nothing in their action to criticise, much less to condemn.... If I rightly interpret the results which these many years of labour have forced upon the members of this Society, and upon others not among our number, who are associated by a similar spirit, it does seem to me that there is at least strong ground for supposing that outside the world (as we have, from the point of view of science, been in the habit of conceiving it), there does lie a region... not open indeed to experimental observation in the same way as the more familiar regions of the material world are open to it, but still with regard to which some experimental information may be laboriously gleaned. Even if we cannot entertain any confident hope of discovering what laws these half-seen phenomena obey, at all events it will be some gain to have shown, not as a matter of speculation or conjecture, but as a matter of ascertained fact, that there are things in heaven and earth not hitherto dreamed of in our scientific philosophy."

These are the words of a statesman not of a dreamer or a fanatic; they express the opinion moreover of a singularly acute and philosophic mind, accustomed to sift and weigh evidence, and experienced in the errors and illusions as well as in the knowledge and thought of his fellow men.

Another famous Prime Minister, the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, also gave his great name to the support of the Psychical Research Society, and for many years before his death was an Honorary Member. So also was the poet Laureate, Alfred Tennyson, the great painters G. F. Watts and Lord Leighton, as well as the famous writers John Ruskin and R. L. Stevenson.

Foremost men of science both in England and abroad have shown their hearty approval by joining the Council or becoming members of the Society. Among these are to be found the recent Presidents of the Royal Society, on all of whom have been conferred the Order of Merit: Lord Rayleigh, Sir Arch. Geikie, Sir W. Crookes, and Sir J. J. Thomson. Another past president of the Royal Society, also given the O.M., Sir William Huggins, assured me of his support, when I issued invitations to the conference which led to the foundation of the Society for Psychical Research in 1882/ Sir Wm. Huggins, however (like Archbishop Benson, who was also in hearty sympathy), for various reasons did not wish to become a member of the, Society, though he had been convinced of the genuineness of certain super-normal phenomena he himself had witnessed.

The active work of Sir Oliver Lodge in connection with the Society, of which he has been President, is well known to everyone. On the Continent and in America many eminent savants have given their valued adhesion to the Society, e.g. Professor Charles Richet of Paris and Professor William James of Harvard, both of whom have been Presidents of the Society, and among other foreign members are to be found the names of Professors Janet, Bernheim, Lombroso, Schiaperelli, Flammarion, and that most strenuous worker Dr. Hyslop; nor must we forget the late Professor Hertz, "the lustre of whose name," as Mr. Balfour remarked in his presidential address, gave an added dignity to our proceedings. Nor have the more enlightened clergy held aloof, such as the late Bishop of Carlisle, the Rev. R. J. Campbell,

1 1 may mention here that In the foundation of the Society my friends the late Mr. Dawson Rogers and Mr. F. W. Myers co-operated.

and Bishop Boyd Carpenter, who has been a recent President of the Society, his successors being Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, D. Litt, Dr. Schiller of Oxford, and Professor Gilbert Murray, D. Litt, who was in 19 16 the President of the Society.

There can be little doubt that much of the success the Society has won is due to the Jivise guidance and indefatigable labour so long given by the first President, Professor Henry Sidgwick, — work most ably and zealously continued by his widow. It is almost needless to mention the immense service rendered to psychical research by the well-known names of those brilliant and gifted men — both Fellows of Trinity College, Camb. — Mr. Ed. Gurney and Mr. F. W. H. Myers, who were the first Honorary Secretaries of the Society. Some of us know the disinterested courage, the eminent fairness, and the self-sacrificing labour which Sidgwick, Myers and Gurney, brought to bear on the study of these difficult problems, and there can be little doubt that in another generation or two the names of these eminent pioneers will be held in honour throughout the educated world.

Some think, not unnaturally, that the S.P.R., as its title is usually designated, proceeds too slowly and cautiously and has not shown a sufficiently open mind towards the physical phenomena of spiritualism.

There is no doubt some truth in this latter criticism, but we must remember that the caution with which the Society for Psychical Research proceeds is characteristic of all scientific investigation, and is doubly necessary in a region where there are so many pitfalls for the unwary. But if it builds up slowly it builds securely, and next to the addition of fresh knowledge within its domain, it welcomes most heartily that investigator who can prove that any of the conclusions at which it has arrived are incorrect. It has no retainingfee on behalf of telepathy or of ghosts, no vested interest in the super-normal. Theories, however plausible, that do not cover the whole of the facts observed must be rejected; superstition reverses this process, but science should know nothing of prejudices and prepossessions. As Sir John Herschel has well said: "The perfect observer will have his eyes, as it were, opened, that they may be struck at once with any occurrence which, according to received theories, ought not to happen, for these are the facts which serve as clues to new discoveries."

It was this openness of mind which led the brave pioneers in the investigation of spiritualistic phenomena, to risk their reputation and encounter ridicule and obloquy by their

1 "Discourse on Natural Philosophy," sec. 5.

enquiry; and when they had obtained what appeared to them conclusive evidence of the genuineness of the phenomena, they published their opinions with what then required rare courage. Foremost amongst these was our own great exposer of fallacies and paradoxes, the eminent mathematician, Professor A. De Morgan, who wrote in 1863: "I am perfectly convinced that I have both seen and heard, in a manner which should make unbelief impossible, things called spiritual which cannot be taken by any rational being to be capable of explanation by imposture, coincidence, or mistake." Similar testimony has been borne by Dr. A. R. Wallace, O.M., and others of note, whilst Sir W. Crookes' famous researches in Spiritualism are known to all.

But not only these and other eminent men have been convinced of the facts, multitudes of men and women in all parts of the world have come to a similar belief. Long ago Dr. A. R. Wallace stated in an article in "Chambers' Encyclopaedia," "Spiritualism has grown and spread continuously till, in spite of ridicule, misrepresentation, and persecution, it has gained converts in every grade of society and

1 Preface to "From Matter to Spirit" (Longmans'). An admirable summary of the statements made by distinguished individuals who have been led to a belief in Spiritualism, is given by Dr. A. R. Wallace in his "Miracles and Modern Spiritualism."

in every civilised portion of the globe." They have had in their own experience indubitable evidence of the existence of phenomena entirely new to the science of to-day — phenomena which receive their simplest solution upon the hypothesis of a spiritual world and of intelligent beings therein, able through certain channels at times to communicate with us. Neither the blazing light of public opinion, nor the rogues that have too often duped the credulous, have shaken a faith which stretches back to a remote past, and which has grown in strength with the accumu-

1 Cf, Myers* "Classical Essays," p. 83, et seq. See also Howitt's "History of the Supernatural," Vol. I, Chapter IX.

Delitzsch, in his "Biblical Psychology," Sect. XVII, shows that "table turning" was practised in many Jewish circles in the seventeenth century; the "table springs up even when laden with many hundredweight." In a work published in 1614 this is denounced as magic. Zebi, in 161 5, defends the practice as not due to magic but to the power of God, "for we sing to the table sacred psalms and songs, and it can be no devil's work where God is remembered."

But, going back 2,000 years, I am informed a prominent feature in the enlightened creed of the early Essenes was their belief in Spiritualism, tending to angel worship. In fact, the tenets of this mystic sect resembled in several other things the views held by many modern Spiritualists.

The early Church Councils, e.ff. of Elvira, a.d. 305, — a little later of Ancyra, — warned Christians against augury and spiritualistic phenomena as the work of the devil and his demons, but in the Ancyra "Canon Episcopi" about 900 A.D., these phenomena were denounced as pure illusions. This was not, however, the opinion of St. Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century nor of the Roman Catholic Church then and now. See Canon McClure's brochure on Spiritualism published by S.P.C.K.

lating evidence forthcoming from time to time and place to place.

Now the philosopher Fichte has said: "Everything great and good upon which our present existence rests, and from which it has proceeded, exists only because noble and wise men have resigned the enjoyments of life for the sake of ideas. " What a man affirms is the idea he has made his own, and this is always interesting and generally worth listening to; and what a number of men affirm and continue unshaken to affirm through years of opposing prejudice, or may be of persecution, is certainly a matter to which every honest lover of truth should give some heed.

On the other hand, what men deny is either valueless, or evidence of the rarity or novelty of the occurrences denied, — unless indeed the denial be a mode of affirming another truth, like the denial of perpetual motion. Thus for anyone to deny the possibility of the electric telephone, as some scientific sceptics did in my hearing in 1877, is of no importance compared with competent witnesses who have seen and heard the telephone.

How comes it then that the denials of the ignorant or the prejudiced as regards spiritualistic phenomena have had more weight in

1 "Fichte's Works," Vol. VII, p. 41.

scientific and popular estimation than the affirmative evidence of the many witnesses we have referred to? The consideration of this question must be deferred to the next chapter.



Chapter III. Conflicting Objections of Science and Religion

"Is anything of God's contriving endangered by Inquiry? Was it the system of the universe or the monks that trembled at the telescope of Galileo? Did the circulation of the firmament stop in terror because Newton laid his daring finger on its pulse 1"— Lowell.

Why, we may well ask, in an age preeminent for its fearless inquiry, and for the daring advance that has been made in regions where ignorance has for centuries reigned supreme, has there not been much more advance in a direction which would appear to be so important? Surely the supreme problem for science to solve if she can, is whether life, as we know it, can exist without protoplasm, or whether we are but the creatures of an idle day; whether the present life is the entrance to an infinite and unseen world beyond, or "the Universe but a soulless interaction of atoms, and life a paltry misery closed in the grave." And although the province of religion is the region of faith, yet, surely, as a handmiaid to faith, the evidence afforded by Spiritualism ought to be welcorned by it. Yet, strangely enough, it is these two great authorities. Science and Religion, which have largely blocked the way. And when we ask the leaders of thought in each to give us the ground for their opposition, we find their reasons are mutually destructive.

Our scientific teachers of the last generation, largely influenced by German materialism, denied, and many still deny the possibility of mind without a material brain, or of any information or knowledge being gained except through the recognised channels of sensation. But our religious teachers stoutly oppose this; they assert that a spiritual world does exist, and that the inspired writings contain a system of knowledge supersensibly given to man. Both views cannot be true, yet both are urged in antagonism to Spiritualism. Their common ground is that all extension of our existing knowledge in their respective departments must only come through the legitimate channels they prescribe; in the one case the channel is that bounded by the known senses, and the known properties of matter, and in the other the channel is that sanctioned by Authority. Everything outside these channels is heresy, and must be discredited. I am, of course, speaking generally, for we all know eminent men, both in science and theology, who take a broader and more rational view.

At the same time there is much to be said on behalf of orthodoxy. The inertia of Conservatism is useful, nay, even necessary, in helping to suppress rash or hasty deviation from the recognised order of things; hence mere aberrations of intellect meet with a steady resistance, but that which is true, however novel it may be, has a resiliency which grows stronger the greater the resistance it encounters, and finally wins its way among our cherished and enduring possessions.

There are some cogent reasons which both science and religion might give for their opposition to this subject. The effect of their opposition has not been by any means an unmixed evil. In the address already referred to Mr. A. J. Balfour has well stated one of these reasons. He says: 'If we took it by itself we should say that scientific men have shown in connection with it a bigoted intolerance, an indifference to strictly scientific evidence, which is, on the face of it, discreditable. I believe that although the course they pursued was not one which it is very easy rationally to justify, nevertheless there was a great deal more of practical wisdom in it than might appear at first sight." He then

1 "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research," Vol. X, p. 4. Mr. Balfour is here speaking of mesmerism, but the remarks equally apply to Spiritualism.

proceeds to show that as no nation or age can do more than the special work which lies before it at the time, so natural science, during its comparatively short life, has had enough to do in building up the whole body of the natural and experimental sciences, which within the last century have been reconstructed from top to bottom. "If science had at first attempted to include in its survey not only physical but psychical phenomena, it might for a century have lost itself in dark and difficult regions, and the work of science to-day would then have been less, not more, complete."

I quite agree with this. Not only had our knowledge of nature to be first learnt, but the foundation of our scientific faith in the undeviating order of nature had also to be laid by the investigation of the laws of matter and motion and the discovery of the orderly evolution of life. What science has now established, and holds as eternally true, is that the universe is a cosmos, not a chaos, that amidst all the mutability of visible things there is no capriciousness, no disorder; that in the interpretation of nature, however entangled or obscure the phenomena may be, we shall never be put to intellectual confusion.

The magnificent procession of phenomena in the midst of which we stand; the realms and magnitudes above us, too vast for the mind to grasp; the molecules and movements around us, too minute or too rapid for the eye to see or the mind to conceive, are all marching to the music of a Divine and Eternal order. On this system of the orderly government of the world, our faith in a Supreme Being is rooted; and the progress of modern science has made this faith an integral part of our daily life, whether we regard the Supreme as an impersonal power or as a beneficent Father. Now, if instead of investigating natural phenomena (I use that term in its common meaning, all phenomena are, strictly speaking, natural, only the Deity is supernatural), science had first grappled with supernormal phenomena, I doubt whether it would have yet emerged from the abyss; certainly it would not have reached its present assured belief in a reign of law. For psychical phenomena are so elusive, the causes so obscure, that we need the steadying influence of the habit of thought engendered by science to enable us patiently and hopefully to pursue our way.

A similar argument holds good in relation to religion. The seers and prophets of the Old Testament were the statesmen and men of science of their day: they were in advance

1 See Appendix A.

of the people, because their thinking was based upon a philosophy illuminated with the Divine idea, — the idea that through all the strife of nature and men one eternal purpose runs. And from Moses to Isaiah we find them united in warning the people against any attempts to peer into and forecast the future, or to meddle with psychical phenomena for this or any lower purpose. Divination j enchantment, witchcraft, astrology, and sorcery were various methods of augury, or of attempts to inflict injury on an enemy, veiled in a cloud of mystery to impress the beholder; and necromancy, or the attempt to hold communication with the dead, seems to have been resorted to chiefly for the same purpose.

These practices were condemned in unmeasured terms by the Hebrew prophets, and this irrespective of any question as to whether the phenomena were genuine or merely the product of trickery and superstition. They were prohibited — as a study of the whole subject undoubtedly shows — not only, or chiefly, because they were the practice, and part of the religious rites of the pagan nations around, but mainly because they tended to obscure the Divine idea, to weaken the supreme faith in, and reverent worship of, the One Omnipotent Being, whom the nation was set apart to proclaim. And the reason was obvious. With no knowledge of the great world-order such as we know possess, the intellectual and moral sense of the people would only have been confounded by these psychical phenomena.

Still worse, a sense of spiritual confusion would have ensued. Not only might the thought, the industry, and the politics of the nation have been hampered or paralysed by giving heed to an oracle rather than to the dictates of reason, but the calm unwavering faith of the nation in an infinitely wise and righteous Ruler of all might have been shaken. Instead of the "arm of the Lord" beyond and above them, a motely crowd of pious, lying, vain, or jibbering spirits would have peopled the unseen; and weariness, perplexity, and, finally, despair would have enervated and destroyed the nation. As a learned and suggestive theologian has said: "Augury and divination wearied a people's intellect, stunted their enterprise, distorted their conscience. Isaiah saw this and warned the people: 'Thy spells and enchantments with which thou hast wearied thyself have led thee astray.' And in later years, Juvenal's strong conscience expressed the same sense of the wearisomeness and waste of time of these practices."

1 Principal G. A. Smith's "Isaiah," Vol. I, p. 199.

With these feelings many of us can sympathise, as we have felt much the same in the quest of these elusive phenomena. But beyond this weariness, which in the search for truth we must endure, the perils which beset the ancient world in the pursuit of psychical knowledge do not apply to scientific investigation to-day, which is based on the acknowledged omnipresence of order.

The aversion that undoubtedly still exists among many Christian men and women to the whole scope of these enquiries is based, I believe, partly upon the warnings contained in the Scriptures, to which I have alluded, and partly upon the more general ground that our investigations are an attempt to force an illegitimate entrance into the spiritual realm, a presumptuous effort to draw aside the veil, which both Scripture and our most sacred feelings have closed over the portals of death.

What can we reply to this? I think the feeling largely arises from a misconception of the position. I have already dealt wih the ground upon which those magnificent men, the Jewish prophets, so strenuously forbade all psychical inquiry — grounds most wise and rational then, but inapplicable now. In the New Testament the condition, to some extent, changes; unmistakable warnings are uttered of the spiritual dissipation and danger which the early Christians would suffer if they allowed their religion to be degraded by the spiritual thaumaturgy still prevalent among neighbouring nations.

The civilised world at that time believed in the existence of spirits in the air, and the illuminated spiritual insight of the Apostles saw (and I, for one, believe we shall all see this more clearly as our knowledge grows) that the unseen around us is tenanted by many spiritual creatures whose influence is sometimes good and sometimes evil. Hence the apostolic injunction 'to try the spirits,' i.e. use our moral judgment and not be led astray by the foolish but common notion that every communication that comes from the unseen is good and worthy of credence. In fact the messages often spring from, and are invariably influenced by, the medium's own sub-conscious life.

Moreover, the Apostle saw clearly, as every Christian sees, that the foundation of religious life, which consisted of faith in a risen Lord, is seriously imperilled when the seen is substituted for the unseen, the phantasms of the spiritualistic seance for the realities of the Kingdom of Heaven, which cometh not with observation.

The same peril exists to-day, and always will exist. This every thoughtful and reverent mind must admit, and it is a distinct warning against making a religion of Spiritualism — ' But this is not an argument against the study of the phenomena as a branch of psychical or psychological science. Whatever be the power or intelligence behind these phenomena, the fact that it manifests itself to us — that, directly or indirectly, it impinges on our senses, and so affects our perceptive faculties, or can leave some permanent record of its presence — this fact not only places Spiritualism within the pale of legitimate experimental inquiry, but invites and demands the attention of science.

It may be that these psychical phenomena are so elusive, depend so largely on conditions beyond our control, such as the activities of the subliminal self, or the volition of discarnate agents, that we shall never arrive at the laws that underlie them. But that need not prevent our observing, recording, and classifying the phenomena, noting the physical and psychical conditions most favourable to their production, and the variations induced by a change in these conditions. Only thus can we hope to link the unknown to the known, and so to correlate these obscure phenomena with the general body of recognised knowledge. Until this is done they will remain an outstanding puzzle, and the educated world will continue to shun them.



Part II



Chapter IV. The Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism

"Science is bound by the everlasting law of honour to face fearlessly every problem Which can fairly be presented to it." — Lord Kelvin.

It is now time to turn from the somewhat lengthy discussion in the preceding pages, and submit some of the evidence which has come under my own observation and has convinced me of the genuineness of the phenomena themselves. It is however hardly possible to convey to others who have not had a similar experience an adequate idea of the strength and cumulative force of the evidence that has compelled one's own belief.

Unfortunately, where there is good coin there is also false, and Spiritualism has suffered from a fraudulent imitation trading on the credulity of the ignorant or uncritical.

In a paper I contributed to the proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research in 1886 I stated that "reviewing the numerous seances I have attended with different private and professional mediums during the last 15 years I find that by far the larger part of the results obtained had absolutely no evidential value in favour of Spiritualism; either the condition of total darkness forbade any trustworthy conclusions, or the results were nothing more than could be explained by a low order of juggling. A few cases, however, stand out as exceptions." These I proceeded to cite, and will here give the substance of two of them, as they offer, in my opinion, unexceptionable evidence of what has been called the "physical phenomena" of Spiritualism, — that is to say, the movement of objects, raps and other sounds displaying an unseen intelligence, for which no normal explanation can be found.

For these manifestations Mr. Myers has suggested the term telekinetic, as spiritualistic is a question-begging expression, for they afford in themselves no evidence of the survival of human personality after death. As a rule they are grotesque and meaningless, it

"Proceedings, Society for Psychical Research," Vol. IV, p. 2%.

See Appendix B, where I have reprinted a note on this paper which was written by that distinguished and far-seeing scientific man the late Professor Balfour Stewart.

is only when the content of some of the messages that are conveyed by telekinesis are examined, that any slight and dubious evidence is found of another personality than that of the medium. The main question is the genuineness of telekinesis itself.

It is therefore important to note that not only did the phenomena I am about to describe take place either in broad daylight or in sufficient artificial light to enable me to detect any fraud, had such been attempted, but there were no paid or professional mediums present, and the sittings were held in any place I selected and even in my own house; notes were taken at the time of the sittings, or shortly after.

The first case I will cite occurred when I was writing an article giving reasons for the opinion expressed in a paper I read before the British Association in 1876, that where fraud did not explain these physical phenomena, and the observers were men of unimpeachable integrity and competence, such as Sir W. Crookes and Professor De Morgan, the witnesses thought they saw what they describe, owing to mal-observation or some hallucination of the senses such as occurs in incipient hypnosis. In fact I began the whole investigation of these phenomena convinced that this was their true explanation, and it was not until after stretching this hypothesis to illegitimate lengths that I found the actual facts completely shattered my theory.

An English solicitor of high standing, Mr. C, had taken for the summer season the suburban residence of a friend of mine, not far from my own house in Kingstown, Co. Dublin. Upon making Mr. C.'s acquaintance I was surprised to find that he had in his own family what appeared to be spiritualistic phenomena then and there going on. They were not spiritualists and were puzzled and somewhat annoyed by the raps and other inexplicable noises that frequently occurred when their daughter Florrie was present — a frank, intelligent child at that time about ten years old. They naturally thought their young daughter was playing some childish tricks, but they soon convinced themselves this was impossible. The governess complained of rappings in different parts of the school room whenever Florrie was idle, and the music mistress asserted that often loud raps would come inside the piano, when Florrie was listlessly playing her scales.

Mr. and Mrs. C. gladly acceded to my request for a personal investigation, and I came the next day after breakfast. It was lo o'clock and a bright summer morning — Mr. and Mrs. C. with Florrie and myself, no one else present, sat at a large dining table, with no cloth on, and the French windows opening on to the lawn, let in a flood of sunlight, so that the sitter's hands and feet could be perfectly well seen. A scraping sound was soon heard, then raps, sometimes on the table, sometimes on the backs of our chairs. Florrie's hand and feet were closely watched, they were absolutely motionless when the sounds, which rapidly grew in loudness, were heard. The noise was exactly such as would be made by hammering small nails into the floor, and my first thought was that some carpenters were in the room above or below, but on examination no one was there. We found the raps grew in intensity when a merry song was struck up, or music was played; the raps in a most amusing way keeping time with the music, occasionally changing to a loud rhythmic scraping, as if the bow of a 'cello were drawn on a piece of wood. Again and again I placed my ear on the very spot whence this rough fiddling appeared to proceed and felt distinctly the rhythmic vibration going on in the table, but no tangible cause was visible either above or below the table.

Doubts have been suggested as to the possibility of localising sounds; with some kinds of sounds this is difficult, but direct experiments which I made for this purpose showed that when blindfolded most people can pretty accurately locate the position of sounds such as I heard on this occasion.

Sometimes the raps travelled away and were heard in different parts of the room out of reach of anyone present. On one occasion I asked for the raps to come on a small table near me, which Florrie was not touching, they did so; I then placed one of my hands on the upper and the other on the under surface of the table, and in this position I felt the slight jarring made by the raps on the part of the table enclosed between my hands. It made no difference whether Florrie and I were alone in the room, as was often the case, or other observers were called in. This latter was done occasionally when the raps were going on, to test my hallucination theory, but everyone heard the sounds.

The alphabet was slowly repeated and questions were answered by the unseen intelligence giving a rap when the right letter was arrived at. In this way we were told the communicator was a lad named Walter Hussey,' and Mrs. C. later on told me that frequently when she went to her child's bedroom to say good-night to her daughter, she heard raps going on and Florrie having an animated conversation with her invisible companion, the alphabet being rapidly spelt over and raps occurring at the right letters. I took down some of the answers obtained by means of the alphabet, they were just such as the child herself would have given, merry and meaningless, the unseen intelligence corresponded to that of the child and to my surprise the spelling was also that of the child! For upon asking Florrie to write down some words that occurred in the messages, the same childish mis-spelling occurred.

Of course the sceptic will say the whole thing was due to a clever child, who enjoyed bamboozling a professor. The sceptic is quite welcome to hold this opinion if it pleases him. All I can say is that after some weeks searching investigation every theory propounded by myself and by sceptical friends — • some of whom were allowed to join in the enquiry — caused me and my friends likewise, to abandon all preconceived theories of fraud and illusion and mal-observation. The phenomena were inexplicable except on the supposition of an unseen intelligence like or actually that of the child. But the force that was sometimes exerted far exceeded that which the child could exert. Movements of furniture occasionally took place. On one occasion in full sunlight when seated with Mr. and Mrs. C. and Florrie at the large mahogany dining table, big enough to seat twelve at dinner, all our fingers visibly resting on the top of the table, suddenly three legs of the table deliberately rose off the floor to a height sufficient to enable me to put my foot beneath the castors. Let anyone try to imitate this by using all the muscular force he possesses, and he will find, as I did, that even allowing the hands to grasp the table, which those present did not attempt to do, the feat can only be done with difficulty and practice by a strong man.

To test a favourite anatomical theory that the raps were due to a trick which the medium might have acquired of slipping the toe or knee joints partially in and out with a click, I asked Florrie to put her hands flat against the wall and to see whether, when I did the same, she could stretch out her feet away from the wall as far as I could, pretending it was a new game between us. When we were both in this strained position, and any muscular movement of the limbs impossible, I asked 'Walter' if he was amused at our game; instantly a brisk pattering of raps came in the room, the child's hands and feet being absolutely motionless, while no one but Florrie and myself were present in the room. Trickery by the servants was out of the question, in fact Mr. C. told me that when he was out of doors with his daughter he had obtained raps on the handle of his umbrella.

After the family had returned to England Mrs. C. informed me that the phenomena died away and they were very glad as they feared the health of their daughter might have suffered, but so far no injury whatever had occurred. ''Of the genuineness of the phenomena (Mrs. C. wrote) I never had the slightest doubt, then or now." The manifestations, they informed me, were often more violent than any I had witnessed and always of a meaningless or frivolous nature.

Let me now narrate a second case where the medium was an adult, a lady who lived with the family of her cousin, a leading photographer in Dublin. I will call her Miss L.; needless to say she was neither a paid nor a professional medium, and I was greatly indebted to Mr. and Miss L. for giving me every opportunity to investigate the phenomena, often at considerable inconvenience to themselves. None of the sittings were in darkness; when held in the evening there was sufficient gas light to enable me to read small print, and of course to see any movement on the part of those present. On one occasion, only Mr. L., Miss L. and myself being present, loud raps which quite startled me, were given on the table at which we sat, and when I asked the unseen visitor to rap the number of fingers I held open, my hand being held out of sight and the opened fingers unseen by anyone, the correct number was rapped out; this was done twice. Knocks came in answer to my request, when we all removed our hands and withdrew a short distance from the table.

Whilst the hands and feet of all were clearly visible and no one touching the table it sidled about in an uneasy manner. It was a fourlegged table, some 4 feet square and heavy. In obedience to my request, first the two legs nearest me and then the two hinder legs rose 8 or 10 inches completely off the ground and thus remained a few moments; not a person touched the table the whole time. I withdrew my chair further, and the table then moved towards me, — Mr. and Miss L. not touching the table at all, — finally the table came up to the arm chair in which I sat and imprisoned me in my seat. When thus under my very nose the table rose repeatedly, and enabled me to be perfectly sure, by the evidence of touch, that it was quite off the ground and that no human being had any part in this or the other movements. To suppose that the table was moved by invisible and non-existent threads, worked by an imaginary accomplice, who must have floated in the air unseen, is a conjecture which sceptics are at liberty to make if they choose.

Subsequently at my request Mr. and Miss L. came to my house at Kingstown, which they had never visited before, and we three had a sitting in the afternoon, with plenty of daylight enabling me to see everything in the room. After a short time raps, varying from faint ticks to loud percussive sounds, were heard, not muffled sounds as would be made by the feet in the carpeted room, but clear and distinct, and not the slightest movement of the hands or feet of any of the three present could be seen. Suddenly, the tips of our fingers only being on the table, the heavy loo table at which we sat began a series of prancing movements; so violently did the claws of the table strike the floor that I had to stop the performance fearing for the safety of the chandelier in the room below. I tried Ito imitate this movement afterwards and found it could only be done by a person using both hands and all his strength.

As in the previous case the messages that were spelt out were just such as the medium, who was a Methodist, would have given, serious and pious platitudes.

The foregoing were among my earliest experiences of the physical phenomena of Spiritualism, and taken along with my later experience and the evidence of others to which I will refer presently, left no shadow of doubt on my mind of the super-normal character of the manifestations. I will now briefly narrate my latest experience which occurred only a few months ago, Christmas 1915.

In the following case I was indebted for my introduction to the sitting to Dr. Crawford — lecturer on Mechanical Engineering at the Queen's University and at the Technical College, Belfast, a trained scientific man holding the D.Sc. degree. Dr. Crawford had for some months been investigating the remarkable physical phenomena that occurred in a small family circle of highly respectable and intelligent working people in Belfast. The medium was the eldest daughter of the family, a girl, Kathleen, of some 17 years. The family had become interested in Spiritualism and had sat regularly one or two evenings a week for a year or more, to see if they could obtain any evidence of survival after bodily death. They made a sort of religious ceremony of their sittings, always opening with prayer and hymns, and when at last phenomena came, their unseen visitors were greeted with delight and respect. Obviously they were uncritical, simple, honest, kind hearted people; Dr. Crawford having assured himself they had no pecuniary or other motive such as notoriety to gain, was allowed and indeed welcomed to make a searching and critical investigation. This he did, devising elaborate and ingenious apparatus to test the phenomena, which he is describing in a work he is about to publish. Inter alia he found that the weight of the medium increased as the amount of the weight of the table or other object which was levitated had decreased.

I was permitted to have an evening sitting with the family, Dr. Crawford accompanying me. We sat outside the small family circle; the room was illuminated with a bright gas flame burning in a lantern, with a large red glass window, on the mantelpiece. The room was small and as our eyes got accustomed to the light we could see all the sitters clearly. They sat round a small table with hands joined together, but no one touching the table. Very soon knocks came and messages were spelt out as one of us repeated the alphabet aloud. Suddenly the knocks increased in violence, and being encouraged, a tremendous bang came which shook the room and resembled the blow of a sledge hammer on an anvil. A tin trumpet which had been placed below the table now poked out its smaller end close under the top of the table near where I was sitting. I was allowed to try and catch it, but it dodged all my attempts in the most amusing way, the medium on the opposite side sat perfectly still, while at my request all held up their joined hands so that I could see no one was touching the trumpet, as it played peep-bo with me. Sounds like the sawing of wood, the bouncing of a ball and other noises occurred, which were inexplicable.

Then the table began to rise from the floor

Some 18 inches and remained so suspended and quite level. I was allowed to go up to the table and saw clearly no one was touching it, a clear space separating the sitters from the table. I tried to press the table down, and though I exerted all my strength could not do so; then I climbed up on the table and sat on it, my feet off the floor, when I was swayed to and fro and finally tipped off. The table of its own accord now turned upside down, no one touching it, and I tried to lift it off the ground, but it could not be stirred, it appeared screwed down to the floor. At my request all the sitters' clasped hands had been kept raised above their heads, and I could see that no one was touching the table; — when I desisted from trying to lift the inverted table from the floor, it righted itself again of its own accord, no one helping it. Numerous sounds displaying an amused intelligence then came, and after each individual present had been greeted with some farewell raps the sitting ended.

It is difficult to imagine how the cleverest conjurer with elaborate apparatus could have performed what I have described; here were a simple family group of earnest seekers, on whose privacy I had intruded and who had suffered Dr. Crawford for 6 months or more to put them to the greatest inconvenience without any remuneration whatever.

But it is the cumulative force of the evidence coming from different places and differend witnesses, some of which will be given in the next chapter, that carries conviction. The objection as to the foolish and meaningless character of the phenomena will be met later, here I will only ask my readers to imagine how a dumb and invisible visitor coming to a house at night would try to attract the attention of the inmates; his efforts to communicate would be not unlike the knockings and sounds made by these unseen visitants. That there is an unseen intelligence behind these manifestations is all we can say, but that is a tremendous assertion, and if admitted destroys the whole basis of materialism.

I am not so foolish as to suppose anything I can say will make an appreciable difference in public opinion, or that my testimony is superior to, or ought to have more weight attached to it, than that of several other observers. But it will, I hope, lead other witnesses to come forward and relate any unexceptionable evidence they possess, until "we drive the objector into being forced to admit the phenomena as inexplicable, at least by him, or to accuse the investigators either of lying, cheating, or of a blindness or forgetfulness incompatible with any intellectual condition except absolute idiocy."

It is true that much of what passes as evidence among certain Spiritualists has no claim to this distinction, and is only evidence of or the difficulty of preserving a sound judgment and uninterrupted attention when dealing with these obscure phenomena. Nor is this to be wondered at. When any of us have obtained what we deem conclusive proof of some amazing occurrence, and are thereby convinced, we are all apt to relax the stringency of our inquiry, and accept as corroborative evidence what to an unconvinced outsider may seem capable of quite a different and more familiar explanation. At the outset we all start from very much the same level; some, of course, are worse observers than others; some jump to conclusions too readily, their judgment is less valuable; but the uniformity of the laws of nature is the common experience of mankind, and the man who tells us his gooseberry bush is bearing cucumbers does not expect to be believed until he can verify so outrageous a statement.



Chapter V. Physical Phenomena Continued

"In saying that a marvel is contrary to experience we can mean no more than that it is unlike previous experience; or rather that it is unlike that portion of experience which has been collected, handed down, and systematised by competent persons. But this only means that it is entirely novel and strange: and the greater the marvel the better must be the testimony [on its behalf]." — Henry Sid g wick.

Let us now turn to some of the undeniable evidence of similar super-normal phenomena that has been obtained by other witnesses. In the most searching examination of this subject which has ever been undertaken, Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, Litt.D., in a paper published in the Proceedings of the Psychical Research Society for 1886/ states her own conviction that ''notwithstanding the absence of what may be called crucial evidence for the existence of these physical phenomena beyond the recognised laws of nature, there is still some evidence which ought not to be set

1 "Proceedings S. P. R.," Vol. IV, p. 72, et seq. SI aside, and affords a prima facie case for further investigation." Mrs. Sidgwick then cites in illustration the Count de Gasparin's careful experiments with his own family and friends on the movement of tables without contact, published by him in Paris in 1854; also the evidence for similar phenomena obtained by a committee for the Dialectical Society in 1870; Sir W. Crookes experiments v/ith D. D. Home, published in the Quarterly Journal of Sciencejhondon, 1874, and the Rev. Stainton Moses' account of phenomena occurring through his own mediumship about the same period.

Mrs. Sidgwick has been unfortunate in her own proctracted experience with professional mediums, but nevertheless states "it is not because I disbelieve in the psychical phonemona of spiritualism, but because I think it more probable than not that such things occasionally occur, that I am interested in estimating the evidence for them." There is not a single sceptic in the world who has devoted as many hours to this enquiry as Mrs. Sidgwick has given years, and I doubt if there exists a more competent critical and cautious investigator than this distinguished lady. Had she been fortunate enough to witness what I have described in the previous chapter, or to have had any sittings with D. D. Home, her opinion, I venture to think, would have been not very different from my own.

The London Dialectical Society consisted of some well-known professional men, and in 1870 they published the report of a special committee appointed to investigate these so-called physical phenomena. They state no paid mediums were employed, the psychics tested being persons of good social position and integrity who had no pecuniary interest to serve. The Committee report the frequent occurrence of raps showing unseen intelligence, and the movement of solid objects without any visible or known cause. On one occasion the committee knelt on chairs placed around, and about a foot away from, a large mahogany dining table, the hands of each person held behind their backs; under these conditions in full light distinct movements of the table occurred several times and swayed about in one direction or another without contact or the possibility of contact with any person present. Raps also occurred on the floor and on the table in answer to request."

This report mentions many other remarkable super-normal phenomena, but it is needless to go into further detail, for these results, and those that I have witnessed, came far short of what Sir W. Crookes obtained in

1 "Report of the Dialectical Society" (Burns & Co., London), p. 39»his own laboratory, under the most stringent conditions that his unrivalled experimental skill could devise.

Sir Wm. Crookes asserts that his experi-* ments demonstrate the occurrence of the following phenomena inexplicable by any known agency: — (i) Raps and percussive sounds varying in loudness from a mere tick to loud thuds, which appeared to be caused by an unseen intelligent operator.

(2) The movement both of small and light, as well as large and heavy, bodies without visible cause or the contact of any human being.

(3) The alteration in the weight of bodies.

(4) The levitation of heavy objects without contact with any person; on three occasions he saw the medium, D. D. Home, raised completely off the ground in good light no one touching him.

(5) Musical instruments played without human intervention, and under conditions rendering them impossible to be played by normal means.

(6) Luminous appearances; more than once he affirms that under strict test conditions he has seen a luminous cloud appear, which condensed into the shape of a perfectly formed hand, that presently faded away.

(7) Intelligent messages written by unseen hands, — ► "direct writing" as it is termed.

(8) Handling red hot coals and placing the hand in a blazing fire without any injury,

(9) Most astonishing of all, phantom forms and faces have appeared, and, under elaborate test conditions a materialized and beautiful female figure several times appeared, clothed in a white robe, so real that not only was its pulse taken but it was repeatedly photographed, sometimes by the aid of the electric arc light, and on one occasion simultaneously with and beside the entranced medium, who was plainer, darker, and considerably smaller than the preternatural visitant, the latter coming into and vanishing from a previously searched, closed, locked room in Mr. Crookes' own house.

Since these almost incredible phenomena occurred (many of them witnessed not only by Mr. — now Sir Wm. — Crookes' own family, but also by other persons) I have been assured by Sir William that no subsequent criticism has failed to shake his opinion of their super-normal character, the elaborate precautions he took preventing the possibility of any fraud. Moreover, Sir Wm. Crookes in his Presidential address to the British Association in 1898 had the courage to state in reference to these investigations he had nothing to retract and that he adhered to the statements he had published.

What can be said of these miracles? They are so foreign to ordinary experience that one naturally thinks the observer was a victim of hallucination or of some clever trick. In a paper I published jointly with Mr. F. W. H. Myers in 1889 we said that on general principles the testimony of no single savant, however eminent, could compel general belief in phenomena so incredible, if they remained unattested by other trustworthy investigators. Now as regards nearly all the phenomena described by Sir W. Crookes this additional testimony has been forthcoming.

For example, an able investigator. Professor Alexander of Rio de Janeiro, published in the "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research" for July, 1891, the details of some carefully conducted experiments he had made which authenticate some of the things attested by Sir. Wm. Crookes. In Professor Alexander's case the medium was one or other of two little girls, daughters of a friend of his, and here, not only did the movement of heavy objects by unseen intelligences occur, but "direct writing," under test conditions, took place in full lamplight; an unseen hand wrote messages on a slate, touched by the child's fingers only, the writing being far superior in execution to the childish caligraphy of the medium. Then luminous appearances presented themselves, at first a flitting, playful light, then growing in definiteness till a form was said to be seen by the little mediums, though not by others present. The clairvoyance was apparently shared by a dog, who gazed upward and barked at the figure, and at another time shared by a baby, who, gazing with astonishment, and pointing to an unseen figure, called, "Man, man," and at last said, "All gone!" Unseen hands were felt by all the sitters, caressing those present, and eventually the imprint of a tiny baby foot, far smaller than that belonging to any of the sitters present, was obtained on a school slate, over which a coating of flour had been spread. This brief narrative gives an imperfect description of the phenomena obtained and the precautions taken, by Professor Alexander, but it is enough to show that independent and able investigators in different parts of the world, with different psychics, have obtained similar extraordinary results.

By far the most remarkable psychic or 'medium,' whose powers have ever been investigated was Mr. D. D. Home, with whom many of Sir W. Crookes' experiments were made. Both Mr. F. W. H. Myers and myself devoted considerable time to examining the evidence on behalf of his super-normal gifts, and also the charges of fraud brought against him; we found plenty of rumours of trickery

1 The question whether the whole of the phenomena may not be explained away by ascribing to every witness gross and persistent exaggeration may be dismissed, as it cannot be seriously maintained; neither is it possible to sustain an explanation founded on a system of laborious and disinterested deception, though isolated cases of this kind are known. Professor Sidgwick has dealt with this point ("Journal of the Society of Psychical Research," July, 1894), and, moreover, such actors not only shrink from scientific scrutiny, but sooner or later get tired of their motiveless deception, or their fraud comes to light.

but no conviction of fraud. Robert Browning's poem 'Sludge the Medium," which was supposed to express his opinion about Home, may possibly have been written to discount Mrs. Barrett Browning's enthusiastic conversion to Spiritualism. Mr. Myers knew Browning personally, and he asked the poet what foundation there was for his bad opinion of Home; Browning replied that he once heard a lady (since dead) tell him that another lady, also deceased, told her, that Home was once found in the act of experimenting with phosphorus in order to produce 'spirit lights.' Of this third hand story we could find no written or any other confirmation whatever, it was an old story when Browning heard it, and probably originated, — like other gossip we have traced to its source, — in someone saying "Home must have produced these spirit lights with phosphorized oil rubbed on his hands," a pure assumption for which we could not find a particle of evidence.

Another charge against Home's character was that he had by fraudulent means persuaded a Mrs. Lyon to leave him her property, a case which led to litigation that went against Home. This case we submitted to a high legal expert, who wrote that whether it was to Home's discredit or not rests on one's belief in the reality of the communications purporting to come from Mrs. Lyon's deceased husband, who urged the gift. Mr. W. M. Wilkinson, an eminent and upright lawyer, and other witnesses in the case declared that Mrs. Lyon made the gift to Home of her own free will, and independent of any unfair influence from Home. But in any case this litigation has no bearing on the reality of Home's psychic powers.

In fact, Home courted the fullest enquiry, and made no objection to the stringent tests often imposed. I quite agree with what Sir William Crookes has said, though I never had the opportunity of meeting Home: —

"I think it is a cruel thing that a man like D. D. Home, gifted with such extraordinary powers, and always willing, nay, anxious, to place himself at the disposal of men of science for investigation, should have lived so many years in London, and with one or two exceptions no one of weight in the scientific world should have thought it worth while to look into the truth or falsity of things which were being talked about in society on all sides. To those who knew him Home was one of the most lovable of men, and his perfect genuineness and uprightness were beyond suspicion."

In the report which Mr. Myers and the present writer published in the "Journal of the Society for Psychical Research" for July, 1889, we gave several first-hand accounts of the marvellous phenomena witnessed by our informants in the presence of Home.

