I will first quote the evidence given to me by my friends the late General and Mrs. Boldero, neither of whom were Spiritualists. Notes of what took place had been written down by my friends and the evidence was given to me verbally and independently by each observer. Home had been staying with the late Lord Dunraven, — who published for Jjrivate circulation a small book giving an account of the marvellous phenomena he had witnessed in Home's presence, — and had never before visited the house where General, then Colonel, Boldero was staying in Scotland, where he held a high military appointment. Here is the account given to me by General Boldero: —

"It was at the end of February, 1870, that Home came to visit me by invitation, at my house in Coupar, Fife. He arrived immediately before dinner, and after dinner we, Mrs. Boldero, Home, and myself, sat in the drawing-room for any manifestations that might occur. The room was quite light, the gas being lighted, and a bright fire burning. Home sat with his back to the fire, at a small table, with a cloth on it. I was opposite to him, and Mrs. Boldero was on his right hand. A piano and Mrs. Boldero's harp were at the end of the drawing-room some 10 feet or 12 feet away.

"Almost immediately some remarkable manifestations occurred; in a little while the table moved towards the piano. I saw a hand come out on my side from under the table, pushing out the tablecloth and striking notes on the piano. Afterwards I saw a whole hand as far as the wrist appear without the tablecloth and strike the notes, placing some chords on the piano. At this time Home was some distance off, and it was physically impossible for him to have struck the piano. It was equally impossible for him to have used his foot for the

Physical Phenomena, continued 6i purpose. I was perfectly confident at the time and am now that trickery on the part of Home was out of the question. After that some chords were faintly struck on the harp standing immediately behind me. We asked for them to play louder, and a reply came by raps, 'We have not power.' Then voices were heard speaking together in the room, two different persons, judging from the intonation. We could not make out the words spoken as Home persisted in speaking to us all the time. We remonstrated with him for speaking, and he replied, *I spoke purposely that you might be convinced the voices were not due to any ventriloquism on my part, as this is impossible when anyone is speaking in his natural voice.' Home's voice was quite unlike that of the voices heard in the air."

The differences and similarities in the account given by husband and wife are instructive. On my reading to him the following account given me by Mrs. Boldero, the General said that where there was a difference his wife's account was probably the more correct. Mrs. Boldero said: —

"On February 28th, 1870, Home arrived at our house shortly before dinner. After dinner we agreed to sit in the drawing-room at a square card-table near the fire. In a few minutes, a cold draught of air was felt on our hands and knockings occurred. Several messages of no consequence came, questions being asked and answered, I was exhorted to pray more. A rustling of dresses was heard, as of a stiff silk dress in the room. [General Boldero recollects this also.] My gold bracelet was unclasped whilst my hands were on the table, and fell upon the floor. [General Boldero agrees to this.] My dress was pulled several times. I think I asked if the piano could be played; it stood at least 12 feet or 14 feet away from us. Almost at once the softest music sounded. I went up to the piano and opened it. I then saw the keys depressed, but no one playing. I stood by its side and watched it, hearing the most lovely chords; the keys seemed to be struck by some invisible hands; all this time Home v/as far distant from the piano. Then a faint sound was heard upon my harp, as of the wind blowing over its strings. I asked if it could be played louder; an answer came, there was insufficient power.

"Later on in the evening, we distinctly heard two voices talking together in the room; the voices appeared to come from opposite corners, near the ceiling, and apparently proceeded from a man and child, but we could not distinguish the words. They sounded far off. Home was talking the whole time the voices were heard, and gave as his reason that he might not be accused of ventriloquism. During the whole of this seance, the whole room seemed to be alive with something, and I remember thinking that no manifestation would surprise me, feeling that the power present could produce anything. Home himself remarked that he had rarely had so satisfactory a seance. Throughout, Home seemed to be intensely, and very genuinely, interested in the whole seance. I am perfectly sure that Home could not possibly have played the piano himself; his touching it was wholly out of the question. General Boldero saw a hand playing on the piano, but I did not see this."

General Boldero also informed me that at another seance with Home he saw a large round table, on the top- of which the sitters' hands were placed, rise completely ofif the ground to a height as great as the upstretched arms of the sitters would allow and then the table gently descended. At another time the table, on which were glasses and a lamp, tilted to such an angle that ordinarily everything would have fallen off, but they remained undisturbed. A similar incident has been witnessed at other places by other persons; thus the Rector of Edmonthorpe, Rutland, the late Rev. H. Douglas, a man of acute and scholarly mind and keen intelligence, writes that at a sitting with Home in Lady Poulett's house in London: 'We all saw the supper table on which there was a quantity of glass and china full of good things, rise to an angle of 45 degrees, I should say, without anything slipping in the least, and then it relapsed to its normal position." My friends the late Lord and Lady Mount Temple were present on this occasion and they confirmed not only the story, but gave me an account of many other weird phenomena they had witnessed with Home.

The late Major-General Drayson, R.E., gave me in writing some of his experiences with Home: he said he had had more than 50 sittings with Home, and though at ixrst absolutely incredulous, was soon convinced of the genuineness of the amazing phenomena he had witnessed, as Home gave him every opportunity for close investigation. General Drayson says: "I have seen tables, chairs, boxes, etc., suddenly rise in the air, or move from distant parts of the room to positions close beside me; I have heard a locked piano in my own house play a piece of music. I have seen in Home's presence, at the late Sir W. Gomm's house, an accordion carried round the room, playing a tune when no visible hand held it." General Drayson relates many other things he has witnessed and adds, "it is of course impossible to give in detail all circumstances which convinced me that imposition or delusion was impossible, — the seances being mostly in my own house, — and finally led me to abandon my former belief in materialism."

It would be wearisome to quote further from the abundant first-hand evidence of Home's powers attested by men of probity and intelligence. There are however two or three extraordinary phenomena which Home occasionally exhibited that are worthy of more than a passing notice; these will be discussed in the next chapter.

This little book would extend beyond its limits if I were to quote even selections from the mass of first-hand evidence given by numerous critical observers of these physical phenomena, and obtained through trustworthy mediums both in England and abroad. I would refer specially to the able work of Mr. Maxwell on meta-psychical phenomena for further evidence. Before closing this chapter it is desirable to refer to another and less satisfactory aspect of this subject as illustrated by the psychic Eusapia Paladino, a paid professional medium of a very different and much lower type than D. D. Home.

In 1894 Si'' Oliver Lodge read a paper before the Society for Psychical Research in which he described the phenomena that took place in his presence, and that of Professor Charles Richet of Paris, when Eusapia was secluded in a small island in the Mediterranean (lie Roubaud) on which Professor Richet had a summer residence. After a searching and prolonged investigation, both of these savants were convinced of the genuineness of the phenomena that occurred, and Sir Oliver published the following summary of the results witnessed: —

"The things for which I wish specially to vouch, as being the most easily and securely observed, and as being amply sufficient in themselves to establish a scientifically unrecognised truth, are (always under conditions such as to prevent normal action on the part of the medium): —

( 1 ) The movements of a distant chair, visible in the moonlight, under circumstances such as to satisfy me that there was no direct mechanical connection.

(2) The distinct and persistent bulging and visible movement of a window-curtain in absence of wind or other ostensible cause.

(3) The winding-up and locomotion of the untouched chalet. [A musical cigar-box, shaped like a chalet.]

(4) The sounding of the notes of the untouched accordion and piano.

(5) The turning of the key on the inside of the sitting-room door, its removal on to the table, and subsequent replacement in door.

(6) The audible movements and gradual inversion of an untouched heavy table, situated behind the medium and out of the circle; and the finding it inverted afterwards.

(7) The visible raising of a heavy table under conditions in which it would be ordinarily impossible to raise it.

(8) The appearance of blue marks on a surface previously blank, without ostensible means of writing.

(9) The graspings, pattings, and clutchings of my head and arms, and back, while the head, and hands, and feet of the medium were under complete control and nowhere near the places touched."

It is needless to add that the observers satisfied themselves that no other person had any part in these occurrences.

Subsequently, a series of experiments were

1 "Journal of the S. P. R.," Vol. VI, November, 1894, p. 310.

made with Eusapia at Cambridge in 1895, in which Dr. Hodgson, Professor Hy. Sidgwick, Mr. Myers (all alas now deceased), and others took part, the result being that the investigators found what seemed to them clear evidence of trickery on the part of the medium. Still further experiments a little later on by Professor Richet and Mr. Myers, after taking special precautions against fraud, led to their conviction that Eusapia had unquestionably super-normal powers. She was further critically and independently tested by several notable scientific men in Italy, — including the eminent criminologist Professor Lombroso, and the neurologist Professor Morselli of Genoa; these and other competent investigators were convinced of the genuineness of the extraordinary phenomena they witnessed. Finally, three members of the Society for Psychical Research specially qualified to detect imposture, were commissioned by the Society to investigate this notorious medium, and they unanimously reported in favour of the genuineness of the supernormal phenomena they obtained.

Nevertheless, although Eusapia appears to have these super-normal powers, she is a medium of a low moral type, who has been convicted of imposture both in England and America and with whom therefore I should not care to have any sittings. My reason for referring to her at all is the notoriety she has gained, and the instructive psychological and moral considerations her career affords.

I will only add that in fairness to Eusapia, and also in corroboration of Sir Oliver Lodge's original report, I have given in Appendix C a more detailed account of the favourable results obtained through her mediumship by the Italian investigators and others, together with some remarks on this case which is, I fear, too often typical of paid professional mediums who sit for physical phenomena.



Chapter VI. Levitation and Impunity to Fire

"There is nothing that need hinder Science from dealing successfully with a world in which personal forces are the starting point of new facts.... The systematic denial on Science's part of personality as a condition of events... may conceivably prove to be the very defect that our descendants will be most surprised at in our own boasted Science." — Professor W. James.

Among the many amazing phenomena which numerous credible, and indeed eminent, witnesses assert that they have seen in connection with the medium D. D. Home, is that of his levitation or floating in the air, like the miracle recorded of St. Teresa and others in still more remote times. As late as 1760, Lord Elcho states "that he heard, when in Rome, witnesses swear to the levitation of a holy man about to be canonized. The same fact is recorded, Mr. A. Lang tells us, in Buddhist and Neoplatonic writings and later among the Red Indians, and in Tonquin, where in 1730 a Jesuit priest asserted he saw this phenomenon, which he describes.

In 1871 the Master of Lindsay (the late Lord Crawford and Balcarres, F.R.S.) gave the following evidence, which was corroborated by the two other spectators, the late Earl of Dunraven (then Lord Adare) and Captain Wynne: — •

"I was sitting on December i6th, 1868, in Lord Adare's rooms in Ashley Place, London, S.W., with Mr. Home and Lord Adare and a. cousin of his. During the sitting, Mr. Home went into a trance, and in that state was carried out of the window in the room next to where we wtrt, and was brought in at our window. The distance between the windows was about seven feet six inches, and there was not the slightest foothold between them, nor was there more than a twelve-inch projection to each window, which served as a ledge to put Howers on. We heard the window in the next room lifted up, and almost immediately after we saw Home floating in the air outside our window. The moon was shining full into the room; my back was to the light, and I saw the shadow on the wall of the window sill, and Home's feet about six inches above it. He remained in this position for a few seconds, then raised the window and glided into the room feet foremost and sat down.

"Lord Adare then went into the next room to look at the window from which he had been carried. It was raised about eighteen inches; and he expressed his wonder how Mr. Home had been taken through so narrow an aperture. Home said, still entranced, 'I will show you,' and then with his back to the window he leaned back and was shot out of the aperture, head

Levitation yi first, with the body rigid, and then returned quite quietly. The window is about seventy feet from the ground. The hypothesis of a mechanical arrangement of ropes or supports outside has been suggested, but does not cover the facts as described."

In an article in the "Contemporary Review" for January, 1876, Dr. Carpenter, the eminent physiologist, commenting on the foregoing says it illustrates how differently a believer and a sceptic view the same incident: "A whole party of believers will say they saw Mr. Home float out of one window and in at another, while a single honest sceptic declares Mr. Home was sitting in his chair all the time." As the only person present whose testimony was not published was Captain Wynne he was written to, and when asked if he had contradicted Lord Crawford's statement, he replied: "The fact of Mr. Home having gone out of one window and in at another I can swear to: anyone who knows me would not for a moment say I was a victim to hallucination or any other humbug of the kind." Like many other controversialists Dr. Carpenter drew on his imagination for his facts in order to support his case.

One naturally supposes, however, that the witnesses must have been mistaken, or suffering from some excitement or hallucination of the senses. But it is not easy to suppose that three educated men, to whom nothing was said beforehand of what they might expect to see, could all have been hallucinated exactly in the same way: for the accounts given by each are alike. Nor is it easy to believe that the numerous witnesses of the levitation of saints and others in past times and in different countries, knowing nothing of each other, were likewise all hallucinated; nor, as Mr. A. Lang says, is it "very easy to hold that a belief — to which the collective evidence is so large and universal, as the belief in levitation, — was caused by a series of saints, sorcerers and others, thrusting their head and shoulders out of a window where the observers could not see them as one sceptic has suggested."

Another singular phenomenon reported in connection with Home, as bizarre as it is unaccountable, is the enormous elongation of his body, which sometimes occurred when he was in a trance. The numerous witnesses to this took every precaution to prevent themselves being deceived and they are unanimous in their statement that this amazing phenomenon actually occurred. My friend the late General Boldero, when Home was staying with him in Scotland, saw this occur several times, took exact measurements and assured me that neither deception nor hallucination were possible. The Neo-platonists report that a similar thing occurred in their day to certain 'possessed' men.

Bewildering and inconceivable as were some of the phenomena associated with Home's mediumship they were not all unparalleled. For the Rev. Stainton Moses to whom I have already referred, experienced levitation no less than ten times. Of Mr. Moses' high character, of his sanity and probity, Mr. W. H. Myers says, "neither I myself, nor so far as I know any person acquainted with Mr. Moses, has ever entertained a doubt." I knew Mr. Moses personally for many years, and like other of his friends, I believe he was wholly incapable of deceit. Mr. Sergeant Cox, not himself a Spiritualist, relates that on one occasion when Mr. Moses was in his house, in broad daylight a large, very heavy mahogany dining table, — which required the effort of two strong men to move, — suddenly and violently rocked to and fro, then it rose, or tilted up, several inches from the floor, first on one side and then on the other.

Frequent loud rappings also came upon the table, on which there was no cloth, and the light fell under it so that they could see no one was concealed beneath the table. In fact Sergeant Cox and Mr. Moses were the only persons present in the room, they were both standing some two feet distant from the table, one on each side of it, their hands not touching the table but held some 8 inches over it. The whole incident was published by Sergeant Cox, and described by him to Mr. Fred. Myers, whose detailed report of the marvels that occurred through Mr. S. Moses' mediumship is worth careful perusal/

On another occasion, when Mr. Moses was in a friend's house, a child's organ on the table was lifted up, and floated round the room, playing all the time by some invisible agency. The chair on which Mr. Moses sat was suddenly drawn across the room, turned round so as to face the wall, no one touching the chair; then, Mr. Moses himself, by the same invisible agency, was steadily lifted up from the chair and raised till his head was near the ceiling; as he was close to the wall he made a pencil mark on it, level with his chest; he was then lowered into his chair again; the height of the mark when measured was found to be over six feet from the floor. All the facts were noted at the time, and even more striking cases of his levitation are described; Mr. Moses discouraged these manifestations which however continued for some time.

To return to Home, like the youths in the Babylonian fiery furnace, Home in his trance

1 "Proceedings, S. P. R.," Vol. IX, pp. 245-352.

was uninjured by fire. Flere I will quote Mr. A. Lang, who has given much attention to the subject of the 'Fire-walk': —

"Many persons in many ages, are said to have handled or walked through fire, not only without suffering pain, but without lesion of the skin. lamblichus mentions this as among the peculiarities of his 'possessed' men; and in 'Modern Mythology' (1897) I have collected first-hand evidence for the feat in classical times, and in India, Figi, Bulgaria, Trinidad, the Straits Settlements, and many other places. The evidence is that of travellers, officials, missionaries, and others, and is backed (for what photographic testimony is worth) by photographs of the performance. To hold glowing coals in his hand, and to communicate the power of doing so to others, was in Home's repertoire. Lord Crawford saw it done on eight occasions, and himself received from Home's hand the glowing coal unharmed. A friend of my own, however, still bears the blister of the hurt received in the process. Sir W. Crooke's evidence follows: —

"At Mr. Home's request, whilst he was entranced I went with him to the fireplace in the back drawingroom. He [the influence controlling Home] said: 'We want you to notice particularly what Dan [i.e. Home] is doing.' Accordingly I stood close to the fire, and stooped down to it when he put his hands in.... Mr. Home then waved the handkerchief about in the air two or three times, held it above his head, and then folded it up and laid it on his hand like a cushion. Putting his other hand into the fire, he took out a large lump of cinder, red-hot at the lower part, and placed the red part on the handkerchief. Under ordinary circumstances it would have been in a blaze. In about half a minute he took it off the handkerchief with his hand, saying, 'As the power is not strong, if we leave the coal longer it will burn.' He then put it on his hand, and brought it to the table in the front room, where all but myself had remained seated."

Not only have we Sir W. Crookes' evidence, but a former President of the Royal Society, the late Sir W. Huggins, O.M., witnessed the same feat with Home and gave me a detailed account of it. So also did Mr. S. C. Hall, who was present on another occasion, when a white-hot coal was put on his head and his white hair gathered over it, but he told me he felt no heat and his hair was wholly uninjured.

Various other eye witnesses have informed me that they have seen Mr. Home handle with impunity red-hot coals; among others a shrewd and able solicitor, the late Mr. W. M. Wilkinson, writing to me from Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, states that in the winter of 1869:—

"I saw Mr. Home take out of our drawing-room fire a red-hot coal, a little le3s in size than a cricketball, and carry it up and down the room. He said to Lord Adare, — now Earl Dunraven, — who was present, 'Will you take it from me? It will not hurt you.* Lord Adare took it from him and held it in his hand for about half a minute, and before he threw It back in the fire I put my hand close to it and felt the heat like that of a live coal."

It is impossible to explain this by some fire resisting substance, surreptitiously put over the skin by Home, for Sir W. Crookes, than whom no higher authority on chemistry can be cited, tells us he knows of no chemical preparation that will accomplish this; moreover, he says he examined Home's hands carefully, after he had carried a live coal about and he could see no burning nor any preparation over the skin, "which (he remarks) was soft and delicate like a woman's."

Now these phenomena are too gross and palpable to be explained by misdescription or lack of attention on the part of the observers. They must have thought they had seen what took place, — a collective hallucination, — or else some miraculous manifestation actually occurred. For all attempts to explain the occurrences as due to clever conjuring on Home's part have signally failed. Experts in conjuring whose opinions have been taken, however little they believe in Home's pretensions, prefer to reject the testimony wholesale rather than attempt to explain these remarkable records.

Can we reject the testimony, — not because the witnesses told conscious falsehoods, that is impossible to believe, but because they were hallucinated? Now at Nancy and other medical schools, where hypnotic suggestion is used therapeutically, it is invariably found that even the best subjects exhibit marked differences in suggestibility, one subject sees the suggested object more clearly and not quite the same as another. But in these marvels recorded w4th Home, the witnesses were not hypnotic subjects and all perceived the same thing, and only occasionally did they receive from Home any suggestion as to what was about to occur. The manifestations are recorded by those present as having been sudden, startling and usually unannounced.

If suggestion on Home's part be the explanation, it must have been purely tjiental; and difficult as it is to suppose all present are equally susceptible to verbal suggestion, the difficulty is vastly intensified when we assume unspoken mental suggestion, acting equally upon all the spectators. Nor must we forget that the witnesses in some cases were entire strangers to Home, and fully aware of,

1 In the "Proceedings, S. P. R.," Vol. XII, p. 21, an interesting paper by Mr. Barrows shows that mental suggestion, without hypnosis, can operate at a distance upon different individuals; but only a single person is affected, and in Home's case we must assume a collective hallucination created by an unspoken suggestion, of which we have no experimental proof, though I admit this is the most plausible hypothesis of the phenomena described in this chapter.

and on their guard against, any possible hallucination/

Nor is it likely that the sporadic cases of levitation recorded in history can all be explained away. Teresa was not the only saint of whom levitation is recorded. In the Acta Sanctorum similar phenomena are attributed to more than 40 saints or other persons, and said to be attested by crowds of their contemporaries. The Bishop of Valencia was believed to have been miraculously suspended for some hours and was thus seen by his clergy and a multitude of others. In fact unless we deny the whole of the past and present records of these phenomena, attempted explanations are as difficult to accept as the miracles themselves.

Then again both in ancient and recent times we have first-hand evidence of the spontaneous occurrence of many of the physical phenomena such as were described in the last chapter. Without warning, pieces of furniture and crockery are thrown about a room, bells are constantly rung, disturbances of all kinds are produced, without any visible cause, and all attempts to catch the supposed prac-

The reader who wishes for more information on Home's marvellous record should read the two volumes "Incidents in my Life," by D, D. Home, or the excellent narrative by Madame Dunglas Home called "The Gift of D. D, Home" (Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.).

tical joker have signally failed. In fact numerous witnesses, whom I have personally cross-examined, have assured me they have seen these things take place in broad daylight or in abundant artificial light, and no person had touched or even come near the things that were moved or thrown about the room. I have published a lengthy paper on the evidence for these Poltergeist phenomena, as they are called; and no doubt whatever rests on my own mind as to the reality and super-normal character of these utterly meaningless phenomena.

All we can do at present is to collect additional evidence and refrain from speculating on the object of these preposterous and futile occurrences, which appear not to have the smallest ethical or religious value. Scientific and philosophical value they have undoubtedly, as must be obvious to any thoughtful reader.

1 See "Proceedings, 8. P. R.," Vol. XXV, p. 377, and Psychical Research (Home Univ. Series), chapter 13.



Chapter VII. On Certain More Disputable Phenomena of Spiritualism: Ectoplasms; Direct Voice and Writing; Materialization; Spirit Photography; The Aura

"By cherishing as a vital principle an unbounded spirit of enquiry and ardency of expectation reason unfetters the mind from prejudices of every kind... guarding only against enthusiasm and self deception by a habit of strict investigation... The character of the true philosopher is to hope all things not impossible and to believe all things not unreasonable."

There are certain other aspects of spiritualistic phenomena to which I have not referred in the preceding pages because the evidence on their behalf is less conclusive. The opinion of some psychical researchers is indeed adverse to their genuineness, or at least their super-normal character. I refer to the alleged *T)irect voice" and "Direct writing"; that is the speaking and writing of the soi-disant

1 Sir John Herschel, Discourse on Natural Philosophy, § 5.

spirit without controlling the medium's muscles, or using them in any way. To this may be added the transport of material objects without human agency, "apports" as they are termed. Further, there are alleged cases of "spirit photography,'' where impressions of persons both deceased and living, and of luminous patches, are said to occur on a photographic plate without any corresponding objective or known cause. All these phenomena,— like that of the alleged materialisation of part of the whole of the spirit form, (to which reference was made in Chapter V) — are comparatively rare and hence less accessible to critical investigation.

So far as my own experience goes I have repeatedly witnessed all these rare phenomena, but they were nearly always with paid professional mediums, and the usual conditions were such as to prevent conclusive evidence being obtained. Nevertheless I have a perfectly open mind on these disputed phenomena; and will go even further, for in some cases, which I investigated, their genuine super-normal character was very difficult to deny.

As regards the "direct voice" and "direct writing," many years ago I had some sittings at the house of my friend the late Mr. Dawson Rogers, with a lady medium, a friend of his, where both these phenomena were produced. The results were remarkable, and obtained under conditions which would have been perfectly satisfactory had there been enough light (which there was not) to form a conclusive opinion.

Reference has been made on p. 56 to the direct writing obtained by Professor Alexander, who was well known to Mr. Myers. In this case the sitting was in full light, and the medium was the young daughter of a personal friend of the Professor, who says ''it was impossible that anyone could have written without being immediately detected"; nevertheless writing by an unseen hand came several times on a slate on which a small piece of slate pencil had been placed. ("Proc. S.P.R.," Vol. VII, p. 181.) It is very difficult to explain away other cases of direct writing, such as those quoted by Dr. Walter Leaf "Proc. S.P.R.," XIX, p. 400, and the numerous cases in which it occurred with the Rev. Stainton Moses, cited in Mr. Myers' record of the experiences of this gifted medium, which were published in the "Proceedings of the S.P.R.," Vols. IX and XI.

Sir W. Crookes records a remarkable attempt at "direct writing" by an unseen hand, which took place through the mediumship of Mr. D. D. Home. The sitting was in the light at his own house, and only a few private friends present. Sir W. Crookes, having asked for a written message, says: —

"A pencil and some pieces of paper were Ij'ing on the centre of the table; presently the pencil rose on its point, and after advancing by hesitating jerks to the paper, fell down. It then rose and again fell. A third time it tried, but with no better result. After this a small wooden lath, which was lying upon the table, slid towards the pencil, and rose a few inches from the table; the pencil rose again, and propping itself against the lath, the two together made an effort to mark the paper. It fell and then a joint effort was again made. After a third trial, the lath gave it up and moved back to its place, the pencil lay as it fell across the paper, and an alphabetic message told us, 'We have tried to do as you asked, but our power is exhausted.' "

As this took place in the light, under the close inspection of Sir W. Crookes and in his own room, neither fraud nor hallucination can reasonably explain the occurrence.

With the well-known professional medium, Slade I had many sittings 40 years ago, and obtained what was alleged to be direct spirit writing on my own marked slate, in full daylight, and under conditions which certainly rendered any explanation by fraud or malobservation difficult to conceive. I believe Slade had genuine super-normal powers;

1 "Researches in Spiritualism," by Sir W. Crookes, p. 93.

this can hardly be doubted after reading the reports given by 'M.A." (Oxon), in his book Psychography, or by Zollner in his Transcendental Physics. Nevertheless, like so many other professional mediums, it is equally true he resorted to trickery, and was convicted of cheating in a notorious case tried in London.

Whilst the evidence against Slade in this case was biased and weak, yet it is obvious we must regard with the gravest doubt all phenomena obtained through any medium who has not a perfectly clean record. Moreover, as Dr. Hodgson and Mr. S. J. Davey have shown conclusively in the "Proceedings of the S.P.R.," Vol. IV, it is very easy for an expert conjurer to simulate what many have considered to be genuine super-normal phenomena, such as occurred with Slade, Eglinton, and other professional mediums. The same volume of the Proceedings also contains a critical paper by Mrs. H. Sidgwick on her spiritistic experiences which, with the discussion thereon, should be read by all enquirers.

As regards the ''direct voice," this was the usual form in v/hich communications came from a well-known American medium, with whom I had several sittings. Here however there was complete darkness, although this was not always resorted to by her. Some remarkable evidence professedly came through the communicating voice, identifying the speaker with deceased friends utterly unknown to the medium, and in some cases in languages unknown to the medium. But here also the medium was not free from suspicion, hence to a critical outsider the evidence cannot have the value which many sitters have attached to it.

More remarkable are the luminous appearances accompanying the mediumship of D. D. Home, the Rev. Stainton Moses and others, which have been observed under such stringent conditions that they cannot be set aside as fraudulent. Points of light darting about the room and floating luminous patches, I have frequently witnessed, and once also, in the late Mr. W. De Morgan's studio, a ''materialized" bust, under what appeared to be excellent conditions, but the inevitable darkness of the room compelled me to regard the evidence as inconclusive. Here however is a record by Sir W. Crookes, who, needless to say, took every precaution to prevent being imposed upon by phosphorized oil or other means; moreover, with all his chemical knowledge and skill he failed to imitate the appearance artificially. "Under the strictest test conditions" Sir W. Crookes says: —

"I have seen a solid self-luminous body, the size and nearly the shape of a turkey's egg, float noiselessly about the room, at one time higher than anyone present could reach standing on tiptoe, and then gently descend to the floor. It was visible for more than ten minutes, and before it faded away it struck the table three times with a sound like that of a hard solid body. During this time the medium was lying back, apparently insensible, in an easy chair."

The still more astonishing results recorded by Sir W. Crookes of the "materialization" of spirit hands or the whole body (see p. 54), remain to this day absolutely inexplicable.

All these phenomena have been termed ectoplasms by Mr. Myers adapting a word suggested by Professor Ochorowicz of Warsaw, whose valuable and confirmatory researches in spiritism I have not space to describe. By Ectoplasy is meant the power of forming outside the body of the medium a concentration of vital energy, or vitalised matter, which operates temporarily in the same way as the body from which it is drawn; so that visible, audible or tangible human-like phenomena are produced. This is very much like the psychic force hypothesis under a new name (see p. 107).

As regards "apports," those I have witnessed with professional mediums were not convincing, and one well-known medium, now dead, I caught in flagrant trickery. But a

* Those who wish for fuller information on these phenomena may consult "Human Personality," Vol. II, p. 544 et seq. or Mr. Henry Holt's "Cosmic Relations," Vol. I, p. 149 et seq.

friend of mine, sitting with a few friends in the country, and no professional medium, gave me the detailed account of an "apport" brought from his ov/n house in London which was so convincing to him and so inexplicable, that I gave a detailed account of it in Light. This formed one of a series of articles I wrote for that Journal in 1881, entitled "Pieces Justificatives," for the formation of a Society for Psychical Research.

I will now turn to the debateable subject of alleged "spirit photography." Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, who made a careful examination of this question, came to the conclusion that the alleged cases of the appearance of a deceased person on a photographic plate, v/ere either wilfully fraudulent or capable of a normal explanation.

Since Mrs. Sidgwick's investigation other cases have occurred which prima facie seem inexplicable in either of these ways. For example. Dr. Hyslop has published a lengthy paper on this subject in the "Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research," giving the reproduction of numerous photographs which appear to afford evidence of a super-normal origin, though I think he

1 See "Proceedings, S. P. R.," Vol. VII, also "Journal S. P. R," Vol. V, for a discussion on the subject.

will agree with me the evidence is far from conclusiveWhile professing, for my own part, to leave the question of spirit-photography an open one, I may here relate a very curious and interesting case of a supposed spirit photograph which some years ago I submitted to searching examination and experiment. Lady C, the relative of a friend of mine, had taken for the summer the late Lord Combermere's country house, Combermere Abbey, in Cheshire. The library in the house was a fine panelled room, and Miss C. (as she then was) was anxious to secure a photograph of it. Accordingly, placing her half-plate camera on its stand in a favorable position, — fronting the unoccupied carved oak arm chair on which Lord Combermere always used to sit, she opened a new box of photographic plates in the dark room, put a plate in the dark slide, and after focussing the camera, inserted and exposed the plate. On developing the plate by herself, she was amazed to find the figure of a leg-less old man seated in the carv'ed oak arm chair.

Shortly after this they found Lord Combermere had died from an accident he met with in London, and was being buried in the family vault, a few miles from his country house, at the very time the photograph was taken. This curious coincidence came out after the photograph had been developed and led to a surmise whether the ghostly figure resembled the late nobleman.

At this point the facts were communicated to me, and I received a print of the photograph. I wrote to the members of Lord Combermere's family and sent them the photograph. The figure was somewhat indistinct and opinions differed as to the likeness; on the whole it was considered to be like him, especially in the peculiar attitude which was habitual to him when seated in his chair.

In reply to my enquiries Miss C. informed me the exposure of the plate was lengthy some 15 minutes, and that she had for a short time left the empty room during the exposure of the plate. I thought it possible one of the men servants had come in and seated himself in the chair until he heard Miss C. returning. Accordingly I made a photographic test of this surmise. Exposing a half-plate in the panelled library of the house of my friend the late Mr. Titus Salt, where I happened to be staying, I asked his eldest son, then a youth, to walk into the room, sit down in the oak arm chair, cross and uncross his legs, move his head slightly, and then walk out of the room.

This was done and we developed the photograph together; when lo! there came out almost a duplicate of the Combermere photograph, a shadowy rather aged man with no legs seated in the chair, and no signs of anyone coming into or leaving the room. I wrote a paper on the whole matter and published it, with a reproduction of the two photographs, in the "Journal of the Society for Psychical Research" for December, 1895.

There I thought the matter ended, with a young footman as the soi-disant Lord Combermere; but I found that Miss C. and some others of the family strongly dissented from my view. They had closely examined their servants and had reason to believe that the denial, by the footman and others, — of any visit to the room at the time when the exposure took place, — was perfectly correct and straightforward.

Some time later an article of mine, which appeared in the Westminster Gazette, and contained a reference to this photograph, brought me the following letter from one of Lord Combermere's married relatives, which disclosed a fact of which I was previously unaware.

"Dear Sir, — Having read your interesting article on the supernormal in the Westminster Gazette of the 9th inst., I cannot resist adding one detail to the account of Lord Combermere's supposed spirit photograph.

"You say he had not lost his legs, but he died from an accident in which they were so much injured, he could never have used them again. He was run over by a wagon at Knightsbridge, crossing the street, and only lived a few weeks.

"Lord Combermere was my father-in-law and I lived some years at the Abbey with him, and was much interested in Miss C 's written account of the photograph, which she gave me. The face was always too indistinct to be quite convincing to me, though some of his children had no doubt at all of the identity. I may add, none of the men servants in the house in the least resembled the figure and were all young men; whilst the outside men were all attending the funeral, which was taking place at the Church four miles off, at the very time the photograph was being done. I give you the pour et contre quite disinterestedly, as I am not myself persuaded one way or the other. — Yours very truly,

"Jane S. C."

There I leave the matter sharing Mrs. C.'s opinion.

Both the late Mr. A. R. Wallace, O.M., and Mr. W. T. Stead, with some other investigators in England and abroad, have been convinced of the genuineness and veridical character of spirit photography; but it is so easy to fake a photograph by double exposure and otherwise, and there are so many accidental causes that give a vraisemblance to ghostly impressions, that we need much more conclusive evidence on this subject than has yet been obtained.

In conclusion I may allude in passing to Baron Reichenbach's "odic lights" and "aura" round the human body. There is nothing inconceivable in such phenomena, in fact some experiments I made in this direction years ago led me to think Reichenbach was not mistaken. But I was more interested in the alleged luminosity which Reichenbach declared his sensitives saw round the poles of a magnet and which in 1883 I set myself to examine.

For this purpose it was necessary to construct an absolutely dark room, to try a large number of people, each of whom had to remain at least half an hour in this darkened chamber to render their eyes sufficiently sensitive to any faint luminosity. When this was done two or three sensitives were found who distinctly saw the luminosity and were able to discover the position of an artificial magnet which, unknown to them, I had secreted in the dark room. Then a powerful electro-magnet was tried and careful precautions were taken to avoid any unconscious suggestion of telepathic influence, or detection of the faint sound that accompanies magnetisation, the sound being by proper means suppressed.

The sensitives immediately drew what they had seen on their return to daylight, their drawings, made independently, agreed, and I published the results both in the ofiicial scientific journal, the Philosophical Magazine for April 1883, and in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research for the same year. Nevertheless, though I myself am perfectly satisfied of the existence of this luminosity, the evidence needs further corroboration before it can be accepted by the scientific world/ No trace of any photographic impression of this alleged luminosity was obtained even after long exposure with extremely sensitive plates, nor after following the suggestions made to me by the late Sir Wm. Huggins, O.M., who took much interest in the matter.

In all these curious and debateable psychical developments the difficulty consists in finding the sensitive whose organization has the peculiar and necessary idiosyncrasy which enables them to become in some cases (like the dowser or water-finder) clairvoyant, in others a medium for physical phenomena or automatic writing. This leads us back to the interesting psychological problem of mediumship, which is discussed in another chapter, and which will form a fruitful field for experimental psychology in the next generation.

1 The late Earl Crawford, then Lord Lindsay, tried similar experiments, at first with doubtful success; but with the medium Home, in 1871, Lord Lindsay states he obtained clear proof of the existence of this luminosity emanating from the poles of a large permanent magnet he had secreted in a dark room.



Part III



Chapter VIII. The Canons of Evidence in Psychical Research

"Nothing can destroy the evidence of testimony in any case but a proof or probability that persons are not competent judges of the facts to which they give testimony, or that they are actually under some indirect influence in giving it in such particular case. Till this is made out the testimony must be admitted." — Bishop Butler.

It is more or less unlikely that those who have never witnessed any of the phenomena we have been discussing will be able to believe in them fully or at all. A natural and proper reservation of mind always accompanies the reception of evidence which is opposed to the general experience of mankind. Even Sir W. Crookes writes that, in recalling the details of what he witnessed, he finds an antagonism in his mind between his reason on the one hand, and on the other the evidence of his

1 "Analogy," part II, chap. 7.

senses, corroborated as it was by that of other witnesses who were present. Yet, as Reid states in his essay on "Mind," and as jurists know, no counsel would venture to offer as an argument that we ought not to put faith in the sworn testimony of trustworthy eyewitnesses because what they assert is incredible; few judges would listen to such pleading.

But, in spite of all logic, we are conscious that

"Events may be so extraordinary that they hardly can be established by testimony. We should not give credit to a man who should affirm that he saw an hundred dice thrown in the air ar.d they all fell on the same faces. If we had ourselves been spectators of such an event, we should not believe our own eyes till we had scrupulously examined all the circumstances, and assured ourselves that there was no trick or deception. After such an examination we should not hesitate to admit it, nothwithstanding its great improbability, and no one would have recourse to an inversion of the laws of vision in order to account for it. This shows that the probability of the continuance of the [recognised] lawa of nature is superior, in our estimation, to every other evidence. One may judge, therefore, of the weight of testimony necessary to prove a suspension of those laws, and how fallacious it is in such cases to apply the common rules of evidence,"

* Laplace, Essai Philosop/iigue sur Us Prolahilites, p. 76.

Hence Bertrand, in his "Traite du Somnambulisme," says, with regard to kindred amazing phenomena, that though by listening to weighty evidence we may conclude there are sufficient reasons for believing them, "yet one really does believe them only after having seen them." We may entertain a limited belief, one tempered with scepticism, but unreserved assent to miracles, ancient or modern, requires actual experience of similar marvels, or absolute faith not only in the wisdom, but also in the strict accuracy and moral worth of the person who attests them; in fact, the inner witness of our spiritual nature to what would otherwise be incredible. Albeit the position taken up by St. Thomas in the Gospels does not justify the scornful attitude of many sceptics. It is utterly unphilosophical to ridicule or deny wellattested phenomena because they are inexplicable. Laplace, Abercrombie, Herschel, and many others might be quoted to this effect, but it is needless to verify so obvious a proposition. Only "in proportion to the difficulty there seems of admitting the facts should be the scrupulous attention we bestow on their examination."

This brings me to the perfectly legitimate position which many take up, and which is justified by the caution that characterises all sound advance in knowledge. It is that the antecedent improbability of these phenomena is so great, they are so far removed from the common experience of mankind, and, moreover, they involve ideas so unrelated to our existing scientific knowledge, that, before we can accept them, we must have, not only evidence, but incontestable evidence, on their behalf/

This is common sense and obviously necessary. Such undeniable evidence I have endeavoured to place before my readers, though it may not be adequate to carry conviction of some of the amazing phenomena related, such as the "materialization" of a spirit form, — on this indeed I reserve my own opinion. On the real objective existence of most of these super-normal physical phenomena the evidence appears to me to be overwhelming.

1 In a paper, "On the Value of Testimony in Matters Extraordinary," Mr. C. C. Massey, following Dr. A. R. Wallace, has urged that the antecedent improbability of an event is simply equivalent to the improbability that affirmative evidence, reaching a certain standard of intrinsic value, will be forthcoming, and therefore vanishes with the occurrence of such evidence; so that adverse presumption ought never to prejudice the reception and estimation of evidence on behalf of some fact outside our experience. Hence (according to this view) we must dissent from the proposition commonly adopted that "improbability" legitimates the demand for an extraordinary amount of evidence, and have regard rather to the positive presumption which experience affords, that the best human testimony, after taking account of all elements of fallacy in the particular case, is only to be found co-existing with the actual fact testified to.

In his presidential address to the S. P. R. in 1889, Professor H. Sidgwick fully discussed, and said the last word on, "The Canons of Evidence in Psychical Research."

Surely it is the business of science to extend its domain in these fruitful fields of research, and it is only because the trained scientific investigator has, until quite recently, turned his back on these phenomena, that the humble spiritualists have had to try and do the neglected work of science in this very difficult region of enquiry; and now having done it to the best of their ability, they are scorned and pelted by the educated world and told they are guilty of "intellectual whoredom," whilst their painstaking effort to enlarge the sum of human knowledge is stigmatised as the "recrudescence of superstition"; and this by the leaders and organs of scientific thought, where one would have expected a welcome even to the humblest seeker after truth/ I heartily agree with our great logician, De Morgan (if I may be excused quoting him again), who says: —

"The Spiritualists, beyond a doubt, are in the track that has led to all advancement in physical science; their opponents are the representatives of those who have striven agaiinst progress.... I say the deluded spirit-rappers are on the right track; they have the spirit and method of the grand old times when those paths were cut through the uncleared forests in which it is now the daily routine to walk. What was that

1 This was written many years ago; happily such ferocious hostility is now rarely found except amongst those steeped in German ways of thought.

spirit? It was the spirit of universal examination wholly unchecked by fear of being detected in the investigation of nonsense. When the Royal Society was founded the Fellows set to work to prove all things, that they might hold fast that which was good. They bent themselves to the question whether sprats were young herrings. They made a circle of the powder of a unicorn's horn and set a spider in the middle of it; 'but it immediately ran out'; they tried several times and the spider 'once made some stay in the powder.* Then they tried Kenelm Digby's sympathetic powder, and those members who had any of the powder of sympathy were desired to bring some of it at the next meeting."

But these childish researches, as we now see them, showed that the enquirers had really been enquiring. Then De Morgan proceeds to show that 'Spiritualists have taken the method of the old time," that they have started a theory and seen how it works, for without a theory facts are a mob, not an army. This was the method of Newton; he started one of the most outrageous ideas that ever was conceived and tried how its consequences worked. For Newton's theory was, 'that there is not a particle of salt in the salt-cellars of the most remote star in the Milky Way that is not always pull, pull, pulling every particle of salt in the salt-cellars of our earth — aye, the pepper in the pepper-boxes, too — our pepper and salt, of course, using retalia-

Canons of Evidence loi tory measures." So the great law of gravitation came to be our heritage; rigorous investigation and overwhelming evidence on behalf of this most improbable idea has established it as a universal truth.

Again, it has now become a scientific heresy to disbelieve in an imperceptible, imponderable, infinitely rare and yet infinitely elastic all-pervading kind of matter, the so-called luminiferous ether, which is both interstellar and interatomic, a material medium of a wholly different order of matter from anything known to our senses, and the very existence of which is only known inferentially. For it is to be noted that this staggering but fruitful idea is based not upon direct but indirect evidence, and this notwithstanding its "antecedent improbability." Moreover, modern science has taught us that there are myriads of waves in the ether which are too short or too long to affect our unaided senses. They might for ever have been falling on us, bringing a constant stream of energy from the sun to the earth, and still we could never have become aware of their existence, or of the medium which carried them, had we trusted solely to the direct evidence of our senses.

A recognised authority has said in a standard text-book, "in earlier times the suggestion of such a medium by anyone would probably

Preface of "Matter to Spirit," p. xix, et seq.

be looked upon as strong evidence of insanity. Even with the evidence which we now have in favour of a space-filling ether, there are many who would rather doubt such evidence than believe in a thing which they cannot taste or smell [or of which we have no direct sense perception]. However, considering the medium as only hypothetical, the fact that it might certainly exist and fill important functions in the life of the universe and still never be detected or suspected by us, is a strong reason why the postulation of such a medium for the explanation of natural phenomena should not be branded as irrational or unphilosophic."

This leads us to ask is there any theory ''not irrational or unphilosophic" that can be suggested to account for the startling and bizarre phenomena described in these chapters. To that let us now turn our attention.

1 Preston's "Theory of Heat," p. 5.



Chapter IX. Theories

"Hypotheses have often an eminent use,* and a facility in framing them, if attended with an equal facility in laying them aside when they have served their turn, is one of the most valuable qualities a philosopher can possess."

— Sir John Herschel.

Let us now consider what hypothesis can be framed to account for the amazing phenomena we have been considering.

The popular view that all mediums are impostors and all the manifestations associated with them are due to fraud, is a convenient explanation for those who will not take the trouble to enquire. But I have never yet met with anyone who has seriously studied the evidence, or engaged in prolonged investigation of this subject, who holds that view, however strongly he may have held it beforehand. Apart from the investigations of the

"Discourse on Natural Philosophy," p. 204.

* A reviewer of Sir O. Lodge's book "Raymond" recently said, "There never yet, we believe, was a medium, unless perhaps it was D. D, Home, who was not sooner or later convicted of gross

Psychical Research Society, — the most notable instance of a body of able enquirers, — with no bias in favour of spiritualism, — who proved 40 years ago that the phenomena could not be explained by imposture, is the Committee of the Dialectical Society already referred to. No doubt fraudulent paid mediums exist, just as bad coins do, and their existence is due to the fact that there are genuine ones to imitate. Sir W. Crookes, O.M., whose high position in the scientific world shows him to be one of the most exact and accomplished of experimental investigators, — has said that he began his enquiry into the phenomena of Spiritualism, believing the whole afifair was superstition and trickery, but he ended by "staking his scientific reputation" that his preconceived ideas were wrong and that a class of phenomena wholly new to science did really exist.

Putting aside the imposture theory, what reasonable hypothesis can we entertain? Hallucination naturally suggests itself, and I have already referred to this in an earlier and deliberate fraud." Such a sweeping statement is simply ludicrous, when the word medium includes men of such probity as the Rev. Stainton Moses and many others, as well as distinguished ladies such as the late Mrs. Verrall and others to be named in later chapters. Moreover, we must remember that what appears to be fraud may not always be so (see p. 123), and further, that it is to Spiritualists themselves we mainly owe the exposure of dishonest mediums.

chapter. I was at one time disposed to think it was an adequate explanation. In fact, in a paper read before the British Association in 1876 on "Abnormal conditions of mind," which is printed in the ''Proceedings of the Psychical Research Society" (vol. i, p. 238), I detailed some experiments I had made, showing that by suggestion it was easy to lead a subject, when in a light hypnotic trance, to hold the most extravagant beliefs, e.g., that he had floated round the room, and this for some days after complete waking. But hallucination cannot account for the permanent records Sir William Crookes obtained, even if it extended to all the numerous witnesses who were sometimes present with him on these occasions. Hence, though admitting that it is of great importance to be on one's guard against hallucination and mal-observation, as well as fraud, I am fully satisfied that these causes are quite inadequate to explain all the phenomena before us.

Let us therefore consider what other hypotheses can be framed to account for the phenomena under discussion. A provisional theory which physiologists might be disposed to accept, when they admit the genuineness of the simpler physical phenomena of spiritualism, is that of an Exo-neural action of the brain. But this must be a sub-conscious action, an effect of the subliminal self to which we shall refer later on. Moreover, this must ibe supplemented by a store of available energy in the unseen, which can not only be controlled and liberated by the subliminal self, but also, in some unknown way, can be made to act directly upon lifeless matter. j So far as I am aware, the first person to suggest an exo-neural action of the mind was Dr. Mayo, F.R.S., in his admirable little book on the "Truths contained in Popular Superstitions," published in 1851. He says in explanation of mesmeric clairvoyance or lucidity, "I hold that the mind of a living person in its most normal state is always, to a certain extent, acting exo-neurally or beyond the limits of the bodily person, and in the lucid state this exo-neural apprehension seems to extend to every object and person around." The high position held by Dr. Mayo as Professor of Physiology in King's College and the Royal College of Surgeons, London, entitled his suggestions to greater consideration than they received.

A theory of this kind was indeed proposed by Count de Gasparin, in 1854, to explain the physical phenomena of Spiritualism, as the result of his prolonged experiments, and a little later by Professor Thury, of Geneva, and again later by Sergeant Cox. This may be called the theory of "ectenic" or ''psychic force/' and it attributes the phenomena to some extension in space of the nervous force of the medium, just as the power of a magnet, or of an electric current, extends beyond itself and can influence and move certain distant bodies which lie within the field of the magnetic or electric force.

It is, however, worth noting that the "psychic force," theory, often adopted at the outset by enquirers, is usually abandoned by them later on as it is inadequate to explain the phenomena we shall discuss subsequently, v/here an intelligence apart from those present is manifested; hence advanced enquirers usually fall back upon the spirit theory as the simplest explanation of all the manifestations. Thus Professor Lombroso, in an article published in the "Annals of Psychical Science" for 1908, states he advocated the psychic force theory until he found it impossible to explain by that hypothesis many of the phenomena which he proceeds to detail. Nevertheless some such theory, as an exoneural action of our organism, which covers the simpler physical phenomena of Spiritualism, may be enunciated in the future by physiologists who wish to escape from the implications involved in the theory of a discarnate intelligence.

There is another hypothesis, somewhat allied to that of psychic force, which is worth consideration. It may be that the intelligence operating at a seance is a Thought-projection of ourselves — that each one of us has his simulacrum in the unseen. That with the growth of our life and character here, a ghostly image of oneself is growing up in the invisible world; nor is this inconceivable. As thought, will, and emotion can affect, and to some extent mould, the gross matter of which our bodies are composed, —

"For of the soule the bodie forme doth take, For soule is forme and doth the bodie make." — a more' perfect impress is quite conceivable upon the finer matter of the unseen universe. The phenomena of telepathy show either that thought can powerfully affect an unseen material medium, or else project particles of thought-stuff through space, or that telepathy is the direct operation of our transcendental or intuitive self, as Mr. Constable has said in his suggestive work on Personality and Telepathy. Physics teaches us that light, heat, electricity, and magnetism affect the matter of an invisible world, the all pervading ether, more perfectly than they do the matter of the visible world. Suns and stars, as well as much of the world in which we live, would

Spenser. "Hymne in honour of Beautie," line 132.

have no existence for us but for the influence they impress upon the unseen ether.

May not thought be able to act in like manner? In fact it has been suggested by two profound and distinguished scientific men, Professors Balfour Stewart and P. G. Tait, ''that thought conceived to affect the matter of another universe simultaneously with this may explain a future state."

The ancient Buddhist doctrine of Karma also teaches that our future state is the result of our thoughts and actions, the sum of our merit or demerit, —

"All that total of a soul Which is the things it did, the thoughts it had."

Karma is thus the relentless operation and spiritual embodiment of the law of cause and effect, from which none of us can escape. In modern Theosophy we find the same idea, developed in connection with the doctrine of re-incarnation. The thoughts of each individual life, generate a thought-body in the unseen, which becomes the next dwelling place of our soul on its return to earth.

1 The whole passage runs as follows: "If we now turn to thought, we find that inasmuch as it affects the substance of the present visible universe, it produces a material organ of memory. But the motions which accompany thought must also affect the invisible order of things, while the forces which cause these motions are likewise derived from the same region, and thus it follows that thought conceived to affect the matter of another universe simultaneously ivith this may explain a future state." —"The Unseen Universe," p. 199. (Fourth Edition.)

Hence the innate dispositions of a child is the result of its own unconscious past, the character it has moulded for itself during a previous existence on earth.

If, in a more concrete manner than Longfellow meant,

"No action whether foul or fair Is ever done but it leaves somewhere A record written by fingers ghostly," if our thoughts and characters are faithfully and indelibly being written on the unseen, we are, in fact, involuntarily and inexorably creating not only in our own soul, but possibly in the invisible world, an image of ourselves, a thought-projection, that embraces both our outer and our innermost life. And it may be that during a seance a quasi-vitality is given to these conceivable thought-bodies which disappears when the sitting is over: there is, as we all know, some drain on the medium's vitality during a successful seance. But whatever explanation we adopt, there appears to be some sympathetic response, something analogous to resonance in the unseen, occurring in these psychical phenomena. Possibly it is this which so often causes the manifesting intelligence to appear but a reflection of the mind of the medium, and leads to the danger, of which investigators are well aware, deceptive communications.

Or we may reverse this hypothesis and hold, with Plato, that the world of sensible things is only an image of the world of ideas existing in a super-sensible world, that objects of sense have only a borrowed existence received from the eternal realities, or ideas in the unseen. This was very much Swedenborg's view, that the objects in the natural world are merely ephemeral counterparts and effects of things and causes in the more real spiritual world into which we pass after this life. We are thus incarnate ghosts of our true selves, fleeting material phantasms of our true and enduring personality.

To return from this digression, — What other theory can be proposed to account for the physical manifestations of what appear to be active and unseen intelligences? The usual theory of Spiritualists is that the phenomena are due to the action of discarnate human beings, who thus seek to make their continued existence known to us. But although these manifestations show intelligence, they afford no proof whatever of the continued existence of human beings after death. Evidence of this, derived from other psychical phenomena, we shall consider later on, and, if the spiritualistic theory be accepted, it may then seem to be the simplest solution of all the phenomena, albeit some of the marvels connected with the medium Home will remain an outstanding puzzle.

Meanwhile it is not a very incredible thing to suppose that in the luminiferous ether (or in some other unseen material medium) life of some kind exists; and that the law of evolution— the Divine law of progress — has been at work, maybe for sons prior to the formation of a habitable earth. If the grosser matter we are familiar with is able to be the vehicle of life, and respond to the Divine spirit, the finer and more plastic matter of the ether might more perfectly manifest and more easily respond to the inscrutable Power that lies behind phenomena. There is nothing extravagant, nothing opposed to our present scientific knowledge, in this assumption.

It is, therefore, in harmony with all we know to entertain a belief in an unseen world, in which myriads of living creatures exist, some with faculties like our own, and others with faculties beneath or transcending our own; and it is possible that the evolutionary development of such a world has run on parallel lines to our own. The rivalry of

1 Isaac Taylor, in his well-known and suggestive book, "Physical Theory of Another Life," chap. 17, which I have read since the above was written, has a similar conjecture, and maintains that the Scriptures support the existence of an entire order of both good and evil beings around us; he holds that "one wellattested instance of the presence and intelligent agency of an invisible being would be enough to carry the question of an invisible economy pervading the visible universe" (p. 264).

life, the existence of instinct, intellect, conscience, will, right and wrong are as probable there as here. And, in course of time, consciousness of our human existence may have come to our unseen neighbours, and some means of mental, or even material, communication with us may have been found. For my own part, it seems not improbable that many of the physical manifestations witnessed in a Spiritualistic seance are the product of human-like, but not really human, intelligences — good or bad daimonia they may be, elementals some have called them, which aggregate round the medium; drawn from that particular plane of mental and moral development in the unseen which corresponds to the mental and moral plane of the medium. The possible danger of such influences I will refer to in a subsequent chapter (see page 250). But if such unseen intelligences have for ages past existed in our midst, may they not have had some share in the history of life on this earth? We know how largely man can modify both organic and inorganic nature by the exercise of his intelligence and will; if we can even alter the varieties of plants and animals by artificial selection, is it unreasonable to suppose that the psychical operation of unseen intelligences may have influenced the course of evolution through the ages? Is it possible that some of the unsolved problems in the doctrine of evolution may have to be shifted from the world of sense and gross matter to the unseen world around us, just as in physics we are gradually shifting our penultimate explanation of perceptible things to the imperceptible ether? The great First Cause must ever lie beyond our ken, but science, which deals with secondary causes, is finding that to many obscure questions the visible world appears to offer no intelligible solution.

The existence of a fourth dimension in space is not an explanation of the origin of the phenomena of Spiritualism, but a mathematical conception that shows the possibility for some of those phenomena to fourdimensional beings, provided they could, under certain circumstances, produce effects visible to us three-dimensional beings. Some of these effects, we can theoretically predict, e.g. the passage of matter through matter, or the knotting of a single endless cord, or loop, or ring of leather. An intelligent being, having the power to produce on this cord four-dimensional bendings, would be able to tie one or more knots on it without loosening the sealed ends of the cord or cutting the ring of leather. Though this feat is to us, of course, impossible, it is asserted that it was successfully performed in a few minutes, in full light, in December, 1877, through the instrumentality of a well-known medium, and in the presence of some distinguished and critical German men of science, Professors ZoUner, Weber, Fechner, and Scheibner. The full account, with the precautions taken to avoid deception, is given in Mr. Massey's translation of Zollner's "Transcendental Physics." Nor was this a unique experience; for a similar experiment, a knot tied in an unseamed ring of leather, is reported to have been successfully made in Russia, and vouched for by the Hon. A. Aksakof. On the other hand, I am not aware of any corroboration of these experiments in recent years, and whilst it seems impossible to explain them away by deception, or gross exaggeration or malobservation, it is wiser to suspend our judgment on these, and some other of the rarer spiritualistic phenomena and regard them as "not proven" until more abundant and conclusive evidence is forthcoming.

This long discussion of various theories has I fear wearied my readers, but psychical researchers are cutting a path through uncleared forests, and all conjectures regarding the right way are useful. To change the simile we are laying the foundations of a new and spacious annex to the temple of knowledge, and we must be prepared to see a forest of scaffolding — in the shape of theories and working hypotheses — arise. Only thus can the solid stones of fact be laid and the temple upbuilt, then in course of time, "the facts will tell their own story and supply their own explanation; at present we have to labour and to wait."



Chapter X. The Problem of Mediumship

"Whose exterior semblance doth belie The Soul's immensity."

It may be asked, and many have asked scornfully, why should a medium be necessary in these Spiritualistic manifestations?

As we are all aware, the production of the phenomena appears to be inseparably connected with some special living organisations that are called "mediumistic." And it may well be, granting the existence of a spiritual world, that a medium is as necessary there as here; in fact, there seems evidence in all the communications purporting to come from deceased persons that they find an intermediary between themselves and the medium on earth is necessary to them as to us. Looked at from a purely scientific standpoint, there is nothing remarkable in this. Certain persons, happily not all of us, are subject to abnormal states of body and mind, and the alienist or pathologist does not refuse to investigate insanity or epilepsy because restricted to a limited number of human beings.

Furthermore, physical science affords abundant analogies of the necessity for a medium, or intermediary, between the unseen and the seen. We know nothing of any of the physical energies, such as electricity, magnetism, light, gravitation, etc., except through their effects on material bodies. They are unseen and unknowable until manifested by their action on matter. We do not see electricity in a lightning flash, only atmospheric particles made white-hot through the resistance they offer to the electric discharge. In like manner the waves of the luminiferous ether require a material medium to absorb them before they can be perceived by our senses; the intermediary may be the photographic plate, the rods and cones of the retina, a blackened surface, or the electric resonators of wireless telegraphy, according to the respective length of those waves; but some medium, formed of ponderable matter, is absolutely necessary to render the chemical, luminous, thermal, or electrical effects of these waves perceptible to us. And the more or less perfect rendering of these effects depends on the more or less perfect synchronism between those ethereal waves and their mundane receiver.

Thus we find certain definite physical media are necessary to enable operations to become perceptible which would otherwise remain imperceptible. Through these media, energy from the unseen physical world without us enters the seen, and passing through the seen affects thereby the unseen mental world within us. The extreme ends of the operation are unknown to us, and it is only during the transition stage that the flux of energy appeals to our senses, and therefore it is only with this stage of appearances, that is to say with phenomena, that science can deal.

This is also true of life itself; for life of any kind, however lowly it may be, is unseen by and unknowable to us per se; we only know life through its varied manifestations in organic matter, that is in living phenomena. This is, of course, equally true of our mind, which reveals itself through the brain, and in like manner a discarnate mind requires a medium for its manifestation. And we may take it as unquestionable, whatever shrinking our religious instincts may at first feel, that anything and everything that enters the world of phenomena becomes thereby a legitimate and promising subject of scientific investigation. As Sir Oliver Lodge has well said: "The least justifiable attitude is that which holds that there are certain departments of truth in the universe which it is not lawful to investigate."

The nexus between the seen and the unseen may be, as we have shown, physical, physiological, or psychical, but whichever it may be, it is a specialised substance, or organ, or organism; in many cases it is a body in a state of unstable equilibrium, and in that case, therefore, of a delicate nature, a body to be handled carefully, and its behaviour or idiosyncrasies needing to be studied and known beforehand.

It is doubtless a peculiar psychical state that confers mediumistic power, but we know nothing of its nature, and we often ruin our experiments and lose our results by our ignorance. Certainly it is very probable that the psychical state of those present at a seance will be found to react on the medium. We should get no results if our photographic plates were exposed to the light of the room simultaneously with the luminous image formed by the lens. In every physical process we have to guard against disturbing causes.

If, for example, the late Prof. S. P. Langley, of Washington, in the delicate experiments he conducted for so many years — exploring the ultra red radiation of the sun — had allowed the thermal radiation of himself or his assistants to fall on his sensitive thermoscope, his results would have been confused and unintelligible. We know that similar confused results are obtained in psychical research, especially by those who fancy the sole function of a scientific investigator is to play the part of an amateur detective; and accordingly what they detect is merely their own incompetency to deal with problems the very elements of which they do not understand and seem incapable of learning. Investigators who, taking an exalted view of their own sagacity, enter upon this enquiry with their minds made up as to the possible or impossible, are sure to fail. Such people should be shunned, as their habit of thought and mode of action are inappropriate, and therefore essentially vulgar, for the essence of vulgarity is inappropriateness.

Inasmuch as we know nothing of the peculiar psychical state that constitutes mediumship, we ought to collect and record all conditirns which attend a successful seance. Mediumship seems in some points analogous to "rapport" in mesmeric trance, and it would be interesting to know whether a mesmeric sensitive is more open to mediumship that the rest of mankind. Again, are those who are good percipients in telepathic experiments also percipients in spontaneous telepathy, such as apparitions at the moment of death, and are these again hypnotic sensitives? Similar questions also arise as to somnambulists; in a word, is there anything in common between the obscure psychical states of these different classes of sensitives? Very probably there is, for all psychical phenomena, as we shall see directly, involve to a greater or less extent the operation of an unconscious part of our personality, a hidden self which in a medium emerges from its obscurity, as the normal consciousness and self-control subsides. This fact does, indeed, afford some clue to the peculiar psychological condition of mediumship.

Here we may remark that our conscious life expresses itself in voluntary muscular movements, such as speech or gesture; whereas our sub-conscious life expresses itself in involuntary muscular action, such as automatic writing or speaking or the motion of a planchette or the 'dowsing rod," etc. Such instrumental appliances for revealing our hidden, sub-conscious self, I have called autoscopes. If the will or reason concerns itself with any of these automatic actions, the motion becomes voluntary and passes from the control of the sub-conscious to that of the conscious self. Hence under such circumstances those psychical phenomena which spring from the sub-conscious self.

will either yield a confusing result or fail entirely.

All I wish to point out here is that mediumship depends on the emergence of the sub-conscious life and therefore the ordinary waking consciousness must be more or less passive. It is the lack of the normal conscious control of his thoughts and actions that renders the medium so liable to the influence of any inimical suggestion from the sitters. For a medium is eminently a suggestible subject, and may sometimes unconsciously be the victim, and not the conscious originator, of the fraud which dominates the opinion of those sceptical investigators who believe all mediums are impostors. In fact, as Dr. Hyslop and many European psychiatrists have shown, an entranced medium is not in a normal condition but shows evidence of hysteria.

It must be borne in mind that the medium understands the phenomena as little as the investigator, or even less if possible, for he has less experience of what goes on, being very often in a trance; hence the medium's opinions or explanation of the manifestations, in his normal state, is quite valueless. The medium should, in fact, be treated as has been already said, and as Sir Oliver Lodge has also said, "as a delicate piece of apparatus wherewith we are making an investigation. The medium is an instrument whose ways and idiosyncrasies must be learnt, and to a certain extent humoured, just as one studies and humours the ways of some much less delicate piece of physical apparatus turned out by a skilled instrument maker."

This is quite consistent with taking all needful precautions against deception. The stricter methods which, I think wisely, the Society for Psychical Research have adopted, have no doubt eliminated much that passed as evidence amongst Spiritualists, and also cleared off a number of those detestable professional rogues who prey on the grief and credulity of mankind.

The word "medium" is certainly an objectionable one. In the public mind it is usually associated with various degrees of rascality, and so long as paid mediums and dark seances are encouraged, and rogues and fools abound, the evil odour which surrounds the name "medium" is likely to remain.

But there is another objection to the word. A "medium" is too often taken to imply an intermediary between the spirit-world and our own; whereas, many so-called Spiritualistic communications are nothing but the unconscious revelation of the medium's own thoughts, or latent memory, or "subliminal self." I agree, therefore, with my friend the late Frederick Myers, who calls the word medium "a barbarous and question begging term," and suggests the use of the word 'automatist"; others have suggested, and some have used, the word "psychic." Either of these words is preferable, if usage were not against them, until a wider interest in, and knowledge of, the whole subject leads to a new terminology.

I have thought it better to keep to the common phraseology, disclaiming, however, the common implication, namely, that the word medium always implies an agent between ourselves and a spiritual world, or a personality, external to the medium. It may be, and very often is, only the unconscious world or unrecognised personality within the medium. For the whole of our personality, as is well known, is not included in the normal self with which we are familiar in our waking life.

There is in each of us an outer as well as an inner court to our personality. The outer being our conscious ego and the inner our sub-conscious ego. To this latter, this self below the threshold (limen) of consciousness, a new significance and importance has been given by Mr. Myers, and the wider term he suggested, the subliminal self, is now familiar. It may here be useful for those of my readers who have not studied psychology to consider the subject of Human personality and Consciousness more closely, as it throws some light on the nature of mediumship and the phenomena we are discussing.

Note. — It has been pointed out on p. 123 that the medium belongs to that class of persons whom Prof. P. Janet in his masterly work "L'Automatisme Psychologique" terms les individus suggestibles; persons controlled by an idea or suggestion either self-originated (auto-suggestion) or coming from without, it may be from the unseen. Something typical of this suggestibility of certain individuals, and not of others in their order, is seen even in lower forms of life, in the way their coloration is affected by the colour of their surroundings, etc. (see p. 156).



Chapter XI. Human Personality: The Subliminal Self

"What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in faculty!... in apprehension how like a god!" — Hamlet II., 2.

Our consciousness is the fundamental fact, the most real thing, of which we are aware, and although it consists of a succession of states of mind, no two of which are exactly alike, it is nevertheless combined into a continuous personal identity which we call *'ourself." Even when there are interruptions of our self-consciousness, as in sleep, we recognise the self that wakes up in the morning as the same self that went to sleep overnight. So also throughout our life we are conscious of the same identity, the same self, albeit the whole material of body, brain and sensory organs has been repeatedly swept away and renewed.

Hence our personality is not a mere bundle of loose sensations: no succession of states of mind, no series of thoughts or feelings can fuse themselves into a single resultant consciousness, with a knowledge and memory of all the other states.

Everyone is now familiar with the rapid succession of instantaneous photographs seen in the cinematograph, where, for example, a series of pictures of a man running swiftly gives us the appearance of a single moving figure. But the photographs remain distinct; the combination is effected by something external to the pictures, our own perception. And so there must be something lying in the background of our consciousness which combines the series of impressions made upon us, or the states of feeling within us; this unifying power we may call our Ego or soul.

Even if the stream of consciousness be, as some believe, an epi-phenomenon, a series of shadows cast by the motion of brain processes, or if consciousness be an attribute of the molecules of organic matter, matter preceding mind, there must be some transcendental and permanent nexus, a soul which unites successive sensations and perceptions into a coherent self-conscious personality; something which gives a meaning to and holds together the stream of manifold ideas.

It is a remarkable fact, that a multitude of impressions are constantly being made upon us, to which this Ego appears to pay no heed. Either because they are not strong enough to pierce our consciousness — for a certain intensity must be reached before an impression can stir our Ego, — a relatively feeble stimulus, such as the light of the stars in daytime, cannot cross the threshold of our consciousness and gain an entrance to our mind — or because among the crowd of strong impressions which do enter, the Ego exercises a selective power. We direct our attention upon a few, chiefly because they interest us; these we are conscious of and can afterwards recall by an effort of memory. The will, moved in the first instance by desire — that is, by what interests us, our ruling love — determines the attention we give to particular impressions; thus we become conscious of, or alive to, thoughts or sensations excited by certain impressions, and let the rest go by unheeded. Our choice thus determines our experience, what we include in our material and mental possessions, our conscious "me"; the "me" being the known, the "I" the knowing, self: all else we regard as the "not me." Furthermore, this process of selection, if we do it regularly, soon becomes habitual or automatic; the effort of attention is no longer required, and the will is set free for some other purpose; for instance, we walk, or we combine the letters in reading instinctively without being conscious of the steps in the process.* And so with the world within ourselves, we do not perceive the regular and continuous beating of the heart, hence the processes of respiration, circulation, and nutrition go on unconsciously in a healthy body. And to some extent this is also true of the nutrition of the mind, for the character is built up, in part, by the stream of unconscious impressions made upon us.

Again, consciousness is not aroused by a continuous succession of uniform impressions. We should be utterly unconscious of warmth, however hot things might be, if everything were at one uniform temperature, and we should be equally unconscious of light if the universe and all material objects were illuminated with a continuous and uniform brightness. It is differences of state that we perceive, or the ratio of the strength of one sensation to another. The actual span of our consciousness is, therefore, very narrow. As the late

1 Education is, in great part, the training to do automatically and unconsciously what would otherwise have to be done with conscious effort. Genius is a still more striking example of the power of unconscious acts. And what is done by the unconscious self is more easily and better done than by the conscious self; hence it would seem as if the summit of attainment would lead to the absence of any conscious effort at all. This, indeed, is the logical outcome of all Naturalistic hypotheses of human life. In a striking passage in the second chapter of "Foundations of Belief," the Right Hon. A. J. Balfour has dealt with this very question.

Professor W. James, of Harvard, remarks in his valuable text-book on Psychology: —

One of the most extraordinary facts of our life is that, although we are besieged at every moment by impressions from our whole sensory surface, we notice so very small a part of them. The sum total of our impressions never enters into our experience, consciously so called, which runs through this sum total like a tiny rill through a broad flowery mead. Yet the physical impressions which do not count are there as much as those which do. Why they fail to pierce the mind is a mystery, and not explained when we invoke die Enge des BeivusstseinSj "the narrowness of consciousness," as its ground.

All these impressions, whether we are conscious of them or not, leave some mark behind; they weave a visible, or invisible thread into the fabric of our life; like every trivial act we perform, they make a perceptible or an imperceptible indent on our personality. We know that this is the case, that impressions not perceived when they were made have, nevertheless, effected a lodgment within us, for although we cannot recall them at pleasure, they often emerge from their latent state in a fragmentary and disconnected manner. This is the case when the attention is withdrawn from things around us in reverie or "crystal gazing," or often in illness or dream, and still more in somnambulism or in hypnotic trance, and in many cases of automatic writing, or other so-called Spiritualistic phenomena.

Our Ego or soul is therefore not merely co-extensive with those things of which we are or have been conscious; the range of our personality must be extended to include something more than our normal self-consciousness. Not only are there, as it were, horizontal strata in our personality, from the material or lowest "me" up to the spiritual or highest "me," but there is also a vertical division which runs through all. On one side of this vertical plane of cleavage lie all those impressions which have penetrated our consciousness, all those states of thought and feeling which in our waking life memory can restore; on the other side lie the vastly greater number of impressions made upon us of which we were unconscious at the time, or, being conscious, have completely forgotten. One part of our Ego is, therefore, illuminated by consciousness, and another part lies in the dark shadow of unconsciousness.

