Kant: "Werke" (Rosenkranz), vii, 53, 59, quoted by Dr. Du Prel in his "Philosophy of Mysticism" (Redway, London). This quotation is from Kant's "Dreams of a Spirit-seer," a translation of which is published by Swan Sonnenschein & Co. Du Prel's work has been, with loving labour, admirably translated by the late Mr. C. C. Massey, not the least valuable part of the work being the translator's own suggestive preface. Mr. Massey has also rendered great service to English readers by his translation of E. von Hartmann's "Spiritism." Like other candid enquirers, this eminent German philosopher, having with painstaking care made himself acquainted with the facts of Spiritualism, states that they afford "an urgent challenge to science to enter upon the exact research of this phenomenal province."

i natural and partly in the spiritual world. In fact, the teaching of the Neo-platonists and mysticism generally is that the soul has a two-fold life, a lower and a higher, lamblichus believed that even in sleep the soul is freed from the constraint of the body and enters on its divine life of intelligence: the night-time of the body being the day-time of the soul/ The "ecstasy" of Plotinus, and earlier still of Philo, was, according to them, the temporary liberation of the soul from its finite consciousness and its union with the Infinite.

Thus we see the opinion of many of the world's great thinkers in the past is quite in accord with recent evidence, which teaches us that our Ego is more than our self-consciousness reveals. As the roots of a tree are hidden in the earth, so we may regard the root of our Ego as sunk in a world beyond our consciousness, and the Neo-platonic idea — that the soul is only partially known in its

See that delightful and well-known work, Vaughan's "Hours with the Mystics." Professor Harnack's article on "Neo-platonism," in the Encyclopedia Briiannica, should be read by all who are interested in this subject.

2 Indeed, a belief in the soul's power to have commerce with the spirit-world has a place in Greek philosophy as early as the 6th century B.C., for Aeschylus was echoing a Pythagorean doctrine when he wrote, "The mind in sleep is bright with eyes" (to receive spiritual impressions). I am indebted to my friend the Rev. M. A. Bayfield for this and many other valued suggestions in this book.

normal, or physically-conditioned, consciousness— becomes intelligible.

There is certainly a world beyond our normal consciousness from which neither space nor time divides us, but only the barrier of our sense-perceptions. This barrier constitutes what has been well termed the "threshold of sensibility," and limits the area of our consciousness. In the progress of evolution from lower to higher forms of life this threshold has been successively shifted, with a corresponding exaltation of consciousness. The organism of an oyster, for instance, constitutes a threshold which shuts it out from the greater part of our sensible world; in like manner the physical organism of man forms a threshold which separates him from the larger and transcendental world of which he forms a part. But this threshold is not immovable. Occasionally in rapture, in dream, and in hypnotic trance it is shifted, and the human spirit temporarily moves in "worlds not realised" by sense. In the clairvoyance of deep hypnotic sleep, and in somnambulism, the threshold is still further shifted and a higher intelligence emerges, with a clearness and power proportional to the more complete cessation of 'the functions and consciousness of our ordinary waking life.

This intelligence, as has been shown above, has powers and perceptions wider and deeper than those of the normal waking consciousness. Accordingly, since the exercise of these faculties in our daily life is apparently hindered by our bodily organism, we may infer that when we are freed from "this muddy vesture of decay," and the soul enters on its larger life, these faculties will no longer be trammelled as they are now. As, one by one, the avenues of sense close for ever, the threshold of sensibility is not suddenly removed; and so, as our loved ones pass from us, it is probable that in most cases the "dawn behind all dawns" creeps gently upward, slowly awakening them to the wider and profounder consciousness that, for good or ill, awaits us all.

*'Peace, peace! he is not dead, he doth not sleep, — He hath awaken'd from the dream of life."

Shelley: "Adonais."



Chapter XXIII. The Divine Ground of the Soul: Re-incarnation

"All outward vision yields to that within, Whereof nor creed nor canon holds the key; We only feel that we have been And evermore shall be."

— Bayard Taylor.

The transcendental phenomena we have been discussing so far from excluding, of necessity presuppose the "Divine ground of the soul," to use a phrase of the mystics. Encompassing the super-normal within us, lies the supernatural, in the true meaning of that word. For ''Behind consciousness itself must certainly be placed the ultimate Reality of which consciousness offers only a reflection or faint representation." The intimacy and immediacy of the union between the soul and God, the Infinite manifesting itself in and through the finite, is the fundamental idea,

1 See upon this subject the striking work on "Personality" by the Rev. J. R. Illingworth, especially Lecture II and the note on p. 24x5, where the views of von Hartmann and Lotze are contrasted.

not only of the mystics, but of the New Testament, and of all great Christian thinkers. The attainment of this profounder consciousness, and therefore of our full personality, is, however, the province of religion, the "true theme of which is not the future life but the higher life."

This knowledge of God, not of the methods of his working, but the consciousness of His presence, is what is meant by religion. From this point of view it is obvious Spiritualism is not and cannot be a religion, which rests essentially upon those higher instincts of the soul we call faith. For, as Canon Scott Holland says in "Lux Mundi" (p. 15) —

"Faith is the power by which conscious life attaches itself to God.... Faith, then, opens an entirely new career to creaturely existence; and the novelty of this career is expressed in the word 'Supernatural.' The supernatural world opens upon us as soon as faith is in being."

In this sense also Spritualism cannot even afford to us knowledge of the supernatural, as it is often claimed to do.' In its true meaning supernatural knowledge is incommunicable from without; it is the voice of the Spirit

1 In Appendix "A" I have discussed more fully the conflicting popular notions that Spiritualism is on the one hand a "recrudescence of superstition" and on the other, "evidence of the supernatural."

to the spirit, or, as Plotinus said, 'The flight of the Alone to the alone," for "the soul must be very still to hear God speak." Of this Divine unveiling the humblest human souls have knowledge, no less than the greatest prophets and poets.

"For more than once when I Sat all alone, revolving in myself The word that is the symbol of myself, The mortal limit of the Self was loosed, And past into the Nameless, as a cloud Melts into Heaven. I touch'd my limbs, the limbs Were strange, not mine — and yet no shade of doubt But utter clearness, and thro' loss of Self The gain of such large life as match'd with ours Were Sun to spark — unshadowable in words. Themselves but shadows of a shadow-world."

It is this "loss of self," this self-surrender, which enables the consciousness of God to enter into our life. Our own will dies and God's will lives in us, and in so far as this is the case we attain the object of our earthly existence, that is, the realisation of a higher and wider consciousness, the discovery of our true personality, which is immortal. This cannot persist until it has been attained, and its attainment is the Way of Life; as Lotze says, "Perfect personality is in God alone."

Tennyson: "The Ancient Sage."

In other words, when we are conscious of the Divine life and love dwelling within us, our human life becomes a conscious partaker of the endless life of God; without this consciousness human life is not only unsatisfying but unenduring.

Here let me remark that the inference commonly drawn that spirit communications teach us the necessary and inherent immortality of the soul is, in my opinion, a mischievous error. It is true they show us that life can exist in the unseen, and — if we accept the evidence for 'identity" — that some we have known on earth are still living and near us, but entrance on a life after death does not necessarily mean immortality, i.e., eternal persistence of our personality; nor does it prove that survival after death extends to all. Obviously no experimental evidence can ever demonstrate either of these beliefs, though it may and does remove the objections raised as to the possibility of survival.

There are many who believe with the devout and learned Henry More, and other Platonists, together with several eminent thinkers of

This view of potential immortality was and is held not only by some learned theologians, both ancient and modern (see Rev. Ed. White's "Life in Christ"), but also by not a few devout and eminent scientific men such as the late Sir G. G. Stokes, a past President of the Royal Society of London.

the present day, such as Professor McTaggart, that the survival of the soul after death involves the assumption of its pre-natal existence. If so, as Mr. C. C. Massey has said, "The whole conception of immortality undergoes an important change if we regard the personal consciousness with its Ego as a mere partial and temporary limitation of a larger self, the growth of many seasons, as it were, of earthly life."

The lack of any memory of our past existences, if such there were, has been urged against the idea of re-incarnation, but this may be only a temporary eclipse. It is possible that recollection of our past lives may gradually return, as in the course of our spiritual progress we gain a larger life and deeper consciousness: the underlying sub-liminal life, may be the golden thread that binds into one all our past and future lives.

As this question of re-incarnation is at present attracting much attention it may be of interest to quote another sentence or two from the devout and suggestive writer named above: —

"We may find," remarks Mr. C. C. Massey, "the ground of re-incarnation in an attraction to this world or principle of life... Whatever has brought us here once will presumably bring us here again and again till the motive power changes.... Regeneration (a new-nature) alone exempts from re-incarnation; the bonds of desire to the external nature being thus severed, all the tendrils of attachment to it are thus eradicated.... The idea of Christianity it seems to me, is that this attachment is broken (for all who desire it broken) by attachment to the Personal Power, that has, in principle, accomplished the rupture. The Buddhist says 'conquer desire,' but that is only negative: Christ supplies the positive; desire Him and you are already free from the grip of earthly desire: for the two desires cannot co-exist."

Doubtless some readers will consider the foregoing remarks out of place in this book, but the subject of Spiritualism is so intimately connected with, and throws so much light on, the whole question of eschatology, that I have ventured to enter upon an inexhaustible subject, one of age-long interest and discussion. Immortality, Matthew Arnold defined as 'living in the eternal order which never dies'; but the soul craves for more than an impersonal existence of love and goodness, truth and beauty, which are in the eternal order, timeless and boundless.

Let us however recognise our ignorance, we cannot see far ahead, 'We have but faith: we cannot know." It may be as Indian philosophy teaches, and the learned Dominican martyr, Bruno, believed, that human

1 "Thoughts of a Modern Mystic," edited by Sir W. F. Barrett, Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.

personality, the individualisation of the soul, is but a fleeting event, which in the infinite bosom of time has only an ephemeral stability and duration, though as a portion of the Divine life it is immortal. The whole universe was to Bruno, as to many later thinkers, a living Cosmos, an eternal transmutation of the World-soul, of the ever present Divine Word.

Certainly all religions must admit that God is the centre, and the manifestation of God the circumference, of all existence. Within this vast circle lies the whole creation, like the myriad cell life in the human body. Each of these cells in our body has a life of its own, yet all are related to a unitary consciousness, a personality which far transcends the life of each cell. Some mysterious mode of intercommunication possibly exists, even would appear to exist, between the individual cells and the sub-conscious self.

Thus also we may conceive the human race as the constituent cells, the many members, of the one Body to which all are related and yet all transcended in the one supreme ineffable Being. Nor can we doubt that some mode of communication and influence passes between the Creator and all creaturely existence. For —

"All are but parts of one stupendous whole, Whose body Nature is, and God the soul."

"Inevitably," Frederick Myers remarks, "as our link with other spirits strengthens, as the life of the organism pours more fully through the individual cell, we shall feel love more ardent, wider wisdom, higher joy; perceiving that this organic unity of Soul, which forms the inward aspect of the telepathic law, is in itself the Order of the Cosmos, the Summation of Things."

On the possibility of this Divine influx some light is thrown by the discovery of Telepathy, the implications of which we will briefly consider in the concluding chapter.

» "Human Personality," ii, 291.



Chapter XXIV. Telepathy and Its Implications

"Each creature holds an insular point in space; Yet what man stirs a finger, breathes a sound, But all the multitudinous beings round In all the countless worlds, with time and place For their conditions, down to the central base, Thrill, happy, in vibration and rebound, Life answering life across the vast profound, In full antiphony, by a common grace?"

I HAVE dealt in this book mainly with Spiritualistic phenomena; it was not my intention here to treat of other subjects of psychical research, most of which are of a less startling character and some, like hypnotism and telepathy, are, in my opinion, almost as fully established as many of the accepted truths of science. We have added considerably to the weight of evidence since Schopenhauer wrote: ''Who at this day doubts the facts of mesmerism and its clairvoyance is not to be called sceptical but ignorant." And this remark would now apply to other branches of our enquiry. Deeply interesting scientific

Mrs. Browning: Sonnet on "Life."

problems lie before us in the immediate future. I can only hint at some of these.

In Thought-transference is it the idea or the word that is transmitted; is it the emotion or the expression of the emotion? I believe it is the former in both cases. But if so, may not this afford a hint towards the possibility of an interchange of thought amongst men in spite of differences in language? Language is but a clumsy instrument of thought, "consisting as it does of arbitrary signs, it is a rudiment of a material system"; and we may expect it to disappear under the action of evolutionary forces. For how much more perfectly should we be able to transmit complex ideas and subtle emotions by the naked intercourse of minds than by the mechanism of speech.

Or again, may not the animals share with man this power? Evidence exists that

1 Isaac Taylor: "Physical Theory of Another Life," p. io3. This book, written nearly fifty years before telepathy was heard of, contains some suggestions very like the above, though I was unaware of this till quite lately. Owing to the use of the phrase thought-reading, the absurd idea is prevalent that thought-transference means reading all the thoughts in another's mind. Only a dominant idea in the agent's, mind is passed on to the percipient, and that apparently requires an effort of will, so that filching one another's thoughts is not possible, and the sanctity and privacy of our minds must always be within our power and possessions, so long as we retain our true self-hood. Professor H. Drummond, in his "Ascent of Man," has also the same idea as I. Taylor: "Telepathy," he remarks, "is theoretically the next stage in the evolution of language," p. 233.

domestic animals often perceive apparitions, and are frequently keener in their perception than man. It would be worth while to try whether animals are open to telepathy; will a favourite dog, for example, respond to the unuttered call of his name, no sense perception reaching him? The habits of ants and bees seem to indicate the possession of a mode of communication unknown to us. If our domestic animals are in any degree open to thought-transference, may we not thus get into somewhat closer communion with them?

But leaving aside such speculations, the wider recognition of the fact of thought-transference will inevitably lead to its culture and development. Does it not already play some part in the growing sense of sympathy and humanity we find in the world around? But if it were as common here among men, as it is doubtless common in the intercourse of the spiritual world, what a change would be wrought! I f we were involuntarily sharers in one another's pleasures and pains, the brotherhood of the race would not be a pious aspiration or a strenuous effort, but the reality of all others most vividly before us; the factor in our lives which would dominate all our conduct. What would be the use of a luxurious mansion at the West End and Parisian cooks if all the time the misery and starvation of our fellow creatures at the East

End were telepathically part and parcel of our daily lives? On the other hand what bright visions and joyous emotions would enter into many dreary and loveless lives if this state of human responsiveness were granted to the race! For, as Shakespeare says, in one of his Sonnets (XLIV.): —

"If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance would not stop my way."

It may be that telepathy is the survival of an old and once common possession of the human race that has fallen into disuse and almost died out with the growth of language. More probably, I think, it is a rudimentary faculty, or possibly an early and special case of the great human rapport which is slowly awakening the race to the sense of a larger self: to

"... A heart that beats In all its pulses with the common heart Of human-kind, which the same things make glad, The same make sorry."

In relation to psychical enquiry, however, one often hears the question still raised "Of what use is it?" When all is said and done, and the facts we are slowly accumulating are generally recognised and accredited, what will be the gain? None at all to such as Peter Bell, to whom a primrose by the river's brim will only excite regret that he cannot eat or drink it; none to the simple, contented heart; none to those saints whose supreme faith has enabled them to transcend all earthly doubt, and who daily ''live as seeing Him who is invisible"; but very much to the rest of mankind, in whom most of us are included.

For, as the learned Dr. Glanville says in the dedication of his famous "Sadducismus Triumphatus," "these things relate to our biggest interests; if established, they secure some of the outworks of religion, and regain a parcel of ground which bold infidelity hath invaded." But our scope is wider than Glanville had before him, and our philosophical need is greater. A false and paralysing materialistic philosophy must either disappear or be reconstructed, when the phenomena we attest can no longer be denied; and so, too, the popular assaults on the Christian religion, based on its incredibility, will be deprived of much of the force they now possess in certain minds.

The most profound change in human thought that has occurred since the Christian era will, in all probability, follow the general recognition by science of the immanence of a spiritual world. Faith will no longer be staggered by trying to conceive of life in the unseen; death will no longer be felt to have so Icy a grip over even Christian hearts; miracles will no longer seem to be the superstitious relics of a barbarous age; the "prayer of faith" will no longer find an adequate explanation in the subjective response it evokes, nor the "Word of the Lord" in mere human aspiration. On the contrary, if, as I hold, telepathy be indisputable, if our creaturely minds can, without voice or language, impress each other, the Infinite and Overshadowing Mind is likely thus to have revealed itself in all ages to responsive humafi hearts. To some gifted souls were given the inner ear, the open vision, the inspired utterance, but to all these comes at times the still small voice, the faint echo within us of that larger Life which is slowly but surely expressing itself in humanity as the ages gradually unfold. Wordsworth felt this when he wrote,

"Not less I deem that there are Powers Which of themselves our minds impress."

But even to those who prefer to regard these phenomena from a purely scientific aspect there will be great gain. I have already alluded to the possible solution which they afford of many perplexing, and at present inscrutable, scientific problems, the opening up of new regions of fruitful experimental enquiry, the impulse they will give to a truer psychology and a healthier philosophy. But in addition to this, they will tend to bring more forcibly before our minds the solidarity of the race, the immanence of the unseen, the dominance of thought and spirit — in a word, the transcendent unity and continuity of life. Our scientific as well as our political memories are short-lived. We only see vividly that in the midst of which we live. What has gone before us is as if it had not been and never could be. So the science of to-day forgets, as has been well said,

"That the tendency of all the earlier systems of physical philosophy was to supernaturalise natural actions, whereas the tendency of modern science is to force into the phenomenal world ultimate causes that must ever be ultra-phenomenal. The older writers on physical science delighted in symbolical designs in which the forces of nature were represented each at his appointed work, and over all they placed a cloud from which issued the hand of God, directing the several agents of the Universe."

The symbol is not unjust, for,

" 'Tis the sublime of man, Our noontide majesty, to know ourselves Parts and proportions of one wondrous whole!... But 'tis God Difused through all, that doth make all one whole."

1 Rodwell: Preface to "Dictionary of Science." 2 Coleridge: "Religious Musings."

We are not isolated in or from the great Cosmos, the light of suns and stars reaches us, the mysterious force of gravitation binds the whole material universe into an organic whole, the minutest molecule and the most distant orb are bathed in one and the self-same medium. But surely beyond and above all these material links is the solidarity of mind. As the essential significance and unity of a honeycomb is not in the cells of wax, but in the common life and purpose of the builders of those cells, so the true significance of nature is not in the material world but in the Mind that gives to it a meaning, and that underlies and unites, that transcends and creates, the phenomenal world through which for a moment each of us is passing.

THE END



Appendix A. Superstition and the Supernatural: Miracles

§1.

The spiritualistic phenomena we have described In this book are usually characterised by sceptics as a "recrudescence of superstition," and by believers as "evidence of the supernatural." If either of these statements be true they have serious and far-reaching consequences, and as they are both supported by some authority, it is eminently desirable we should examine these assertions carefully. And, first, what is the meaning to be attached to "superstition" on the one hand, and "supernatural" on the other? Superstition (Lat., superstitio) is etymologically the standing over a thing in amazement or awe. By so doing we shut out the light of enquiry and reason; where this light enters superstition fades away, so that we no longer enshroud a mystery by standing over it, but begin to understand it. Superstition is, therefore, the antithesis of under-

1 Leading review in Nature, Vol. LI, 1894, p. 22.

2 Johnson gives several definitions; the best is "unnecessary fear." Cicero says it is "a certain empty dread of the gods." Plutarch's definition, in his interesting essay on Superstition, resembles this.

standing, and of that faith in the intelligibility of the universe which is the sheet anchor of science and the lode-star of all intellectual progress.

The definition given by a learned writer, Sir G. W. Cox, seems to me near the truth, if supplemented by the clause I have added in brackets, viz.: Superstition is a belief not in accordance with facts [wherein a false cause is assumed for a fact or occurrence], and issues in superstitious practices when such a belief is regarded as capable of affording help or injury. Hence, when a primary hypothesis is not only erroneous, but unrelated to the facts in question, we have the basis of superstition and its attendant evils, though the deductive reasonings from that hypothesis may be irrefragable. The witch mania was thus a horrible superstition. False ideas of the Cosmos are fruitful sources of absurd and sometimes revolting superstitions.

We are now in a position to test the first assertion: Is Spiritualism — using the word in the sense defined on page 9 — a superstition? Certainly it is, if not in accordance with facts; but those who assert this are the very persons who, on a priori grounds, deem the facts impossible or unverifiable, and have therefore never given to the subject any painstaking study whatever. Those who have been eye-witnesses and made it a subject of laborious investigation, at first hand, assert that certain phenomena entirely new to science do exist, that the facts are there; in fine, although differences of opinion may exist as to the interpretation of those facts, no one has yet proved that a belief in these phenomena is utterly groundless. On the contrary, every painstaking and honest investigator who has endeavoured to prove this, so far as I know, has failed, and many such have eventually changed sides.

But if this be so, it is obvious that, with regard to these phenomena, the primary hypothesis of many scientific and educated men to-day — which leads them to reject the evidence adduced — is not in accordance with fact; and such a belief issues in a conduct opposed to the attainment of truth. Is it not, therefore, the average man of science, the average public opinion of to-day, that is on this subject foolishly superstitious? Nor must we forget the consequences of this erroneous belief upon the holders themselves. As the able and thoughtful writer, whose definition of superstition I have adopted, has said: —

"It follows that every belief and every practice not based on, or not in accordance with, actual fact, must have an injurious effect on the mental and moral state of the thinker or actor. How great may be the mischief so produced, and how far it may check the growth of all literature, art, and science, the reader may gather from the 9th chapter of Hallam's 'Middle Ages.' "

We are all familiar with one mischievous effect of this erroneous habit of thought on the part of the materialistic school of scientific thought. Starting from the fundamental principle of the denial of an unseen or spiritual world, everything is made to give way to that; albeit the ludicrous arrogance of this denial is obvious when we consider the narrow limits both of our knowledge and of our senses. According to this school, "any solution of a difficulty is more probable than one which would concede that a miracle had really occurred. This explains their seeming want of candour, and why they meet with evasions, proofs that seem to be demon-

1 "Dictionary of Science," by Dr. Brande, F.R.S,, and Sir G. W. Cox, M.A.; Art., "Superstition."

strative." These are the words a former learned Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, Dr. Salmon, applies to the Biblical critics of that school, and they are equally true of many ferocious sceptics in connection with Psychical Research.

Let us now examine the second and opposite assertion, that Spiritualism is "evidence of the supernatural." Putting aside that school of thought which denies the supernatural in toto, numerous attempts have been made to define the word supernatural. Strictly speaking, as God is the Creator and Source of all things, He only can be over or above Nature. Archbishop Whately remarks: —

"As Nature is another word to signify the state of things and course of events God has appointed, nothing that occurs can be strictly called supernatural. Jesus Himself describes His works, not as violations of the laws of Nature, but as 'works which none other man did.' Superhuman would, perhaps, be a better word than supernatural."

But this was not the Idea of the writers either In the Old or New Testaments. Their idea was one common to the age In which they lived, viz., that of the arbitrary action of a Supreme Being breaking In upon the ordinary course of events for a special purpose; a miracle was thus a sign or wonder wrought In order to attest His existence and power. Obviously, until science had

1 Of such it has been truly remarked, "There is a bigotry of unbelief quite as blind and irrational, involving quite as thorough an abnegation of the highest faculties of the human mind, as can possibly be the case with the bigotry of superstition."— Rev. J. J. Lias: "Are Miracles Credible?" p. 12.

given us conclusive evidence of an undeviating order in Nature, there could be no clear idea of a miracle as involving a violation of that order, no correct view of the "supernatural."

An interesting discussion on the meaning of the word supernatural is to be found in Dr. Horace Bushnell's suggestive and well-known work, "Nature and the Super-natural." Bishop Butler gives a sound view of the matter. He says in his "Analogy," Part I, chap, i:

"The only distinct meaning of that word [natural] is — stated, fixed, or settled; since what is natural, as much requires and presupposes an intelligent agent to render it so, i.e., to effect it continually or at stated times; as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it for once. And from hence it must follow that persons' notion of what is natural will be enlarged in proportion to their greater knowledge of the works of God, and the dispensations of His providence. Nor is there any absurdity in supposing that there may be beings in the universe whose capacities and knowledge and views may be so extensive, as that the whole Christian dispensation may to them appear natural, i.e., analogous or conformable to God's dealings with other parts of His creation; as natural as the visible known course of things appears to us."

Similarly St. Augustine remarked: "Miracles do not happen in contradiction to nature, but only in contradiction to that which is known to us of nature." This is the view held by most modern theologians.

In fine, as a former Savilian Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford, the Rev. Baden Powell, F.R.S., said in his admirable series of essays on the "Order of Nature," p. 232, et seq.: —

"The limits of the study of nature do not bring us to

3o6 Appendix A the supernatural... if at any particular point science finds a present limit, what is beyond science is not therefore beyond nature; it is only unknown nature; when we cease to trace law we are sure law remains to be traced. Whatever amount of the marvellous we encounter in the investigation of facts, such extraordinary phenomena will be sure at some future time to receive their explanation. As Spinoza argued, we cannot pretend to determine the boundary between the natural and the supernatural until the whole of Nature is open to our knowledge.... From the very conditions of the case it is evident that the supernatural can never be a matter of science or knowledge, for the moment it is brought within the cognisance of reason it ceases to be supernatural."

From this point of view it will be seen that Spiritualism is not and cannot be "evidence of the supernatural."

The popular meaning attached to the word super-natural is, however, "Some occurrence which affords evidence of an unseen or spiritual world outside ourselves, and therefore not belonging to the present or visible order of nature." In this sense only but still improperly we might speak of certain well-attested spiritualistic phenomena as supernatural.

Those who deny all miracles assume they know all the laws of the universe. On such men argument is wasted and they must be left alone if they refuse to listen to good evidence. As Archbishop Whately in an Essay on Superstition, wisely says, "If either Roman Catholics, or any others, will give sufficient proofs of the occurrence of a miracle, they ought to be listened to; but to pretend to, or to believe in, any miracle without sufficient proof is clearly superstition."

In view of the phenomena of Spiritualism, I would venture to suggest the definition that miracles are super-normal and therefore rare manifestations of mind, and as such they may be evidence cither (i.) of the Infinite Mind, or (ii.) of a finite mind in the unseen, or (iii.) of a higher transcendental part of the human mind.

Another and vital distinction must be drawn between miracles which are voluntary exhibitions of super-normal power for a Divine purpose; and miracles, such as some of the phenomena we have been considering, which are manifestations of an intelligence and a power wholly beyond the control of the psychic, and with which his volition is concerned only so far as the withdrawal of any opposing mental condition. Of these latter (relative miracles) it is probable that the progress of research may render the miracle of to-day the accepted scientific fact of to-morrow. But the former being self-determined are not in the same category, and therefore will remain, as Kant says, among "events in the world the operative laws of whose causes are, and must remain, utterly unknown to us."

It will thus be seen that the common Protestant belief that miracles, using this term in its widest sense, are credible in Scripture, but incredible out of it, is inaccurate. As Dr. Bushnell has well shown, so far from the age of miracles being past, there is unbroken testimony, from the apostolic times to the present, of the existence of miracles, i.e., evidence of a super-normal character on behalf of the existence and operation of unseen Intelligence.



Appendix B. Note by Prof. Balfour Stewart, LL.D., F.R.S.

I HAVE read with much interest the paper by Professor Barrett, on some Physical Phenomena commonly called Spiritualistic witnessed by him. He expresses his conclusions in the following words: "Assuming the evidence to be trustworthy, I, for one, believe it points to the conclusion that, under conditions which are so restricted that we are not put to intellectual confusion by frequent interruptions of the ordinary course of material laws, mind occasionally and unconsciously can exert a direct influence upon lifeless matter."

As this is a subject to which I have given a good deal of thought, I trust the Psychical Society will allow me to make one or two remarks upon it, and I am very sure my friend, Professor Barrett, will not object to this course.

Viewing the "Conservation of Energy" as the representative of physical laws, I nevertheless do not regard it in its birth, at least, as anything else than a scientific assertion — a very sagacious one, no doubt, but yet an assertion. We are in profound ignorance not only of the ultimate constitution of matter, but of the nature of those forces which animate the atom and

1 This note formed the supplement to my paper on the "Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism" and was published ia the "Proceedings S.P.R.," Vol. IV, p. 43.

the molecule. Under these circumstances, chiefly to advance physical knowledge by means of a working hypothesis, but partly, it may be, as a weapon against visionaries, we have formulated an assertion known as the "Conservation of Energy." It is unquestionable that this so-called law has greatly extended our knowledge of physics; nor have we met with any strictly physical experiment capable of repetition under fixed conditions that is inconsistent with this law. Now, what should be our course of action when a visionary comes before us with some variety of "Perpetual Motion?" The moral certainty that we are invaded by presumptuous ignorance is, no doubt, a sufficiently good excuse for not discussing the project. But we have a less objectionable method of dealing with such a man by asking him to put his project in execution, and to produce his machine, which we will then carefully examine. The fact that no such machine has been produced, and, as I said before, that no physical experiment contradicts the great laws of Energy, goes surely very far to justify us in regarding these laws as true — as laws which hold in what I may call the physical market of the world, ruling the physical transactions between man and man.

But there are many who are not content with such a limited application of physical laws. In the first place, they repudiate the doctrine of free-will because they regard it as being inconsistent with such laws; secondly, they repudiate the possibility of what are called miracles; and, lastly, they repudiate (with contempt) the evidence for telepathy, and more especially that for Spiritualistic phenomena which has come before the Society for Psychical Research.

One consequence of this mental posture is that

3IO Appendix B interminable discussions have arisen between a certain class of men of science and the supporters of Christianity, the latter of whom have been far from judicious in their method of defence. These have until recently considered miracles as Divine interferences with ordinary laws, and hence as abnormal and intellectually incomprehensible occurrences, while the Protestant theologians have imagined that the power to work miracles ceased with the Apostles. This latter doctrine was probably assumed as a polemical weapon at the time of the great controversy with the Church of Rome. It goes without saying that this method of looking at things will not recommend itself to men of science, and thus an embittered and useless discussion has continued between two classes of men, neither of whom has seemed to be either able or willing to enter into the position assumed by the other.

Of late years, however, miracles have come to be regarded not as breaks of law, but as phenomena embracing a higher law — a doctrine which is a great advance upon its predecessor. Now the question naturally arises, if there be this higher law, may there not be occasional traces of it to be met with in the world, even at this present age? It is, I think, exceedingly unfortunate that a large class of theologians have attempted to decide this question in the negative. It is not a question for them to decide, but for those who investigate matters of fact. This is in reality the question upon which the Psychical Society are engaged, and the circumstances which I have mentioned appear to me to lend an unusual importance to their investigations. Let us begin by allowing that the laws of Energy dominate the scientific market-place,

See Appendix A, p. 307.

and the scientific dealings between man and man. We are, I conceive, extending this scientific assertion so far. But are we justified in extending it further? Are we, for instance, justified in asserting that under the very different conditions of things contemplated by the Psychical Society there may not be at least an apparent and prima facie breakdown of these laws; and more especially, are we justified in absolutely shutting our eyes to all evidence that may be brought before us in favour of such apparent interruptions? I cannot think so. We must examine everything. Because a scientific statement applies to one set of conditions, must it necessarily apply to everything else? I have always thought that this had to be ascertained by investigation, and not by dogmatic assertion, and I therefore conceive that our Society is abundantly justified in applying the Baconian method of research to all occurrences.



Appendix C. Eusapia Paladino

After the favourable reports by Professor Charles Richet and Sir Oliver Lodge upon their experiments with Eusapia, referred to on page 65, as there stated further seances were held with her at Cambridge in 1895. I was not present, and, indeed, have never had the opportunity nor the desire to experiment with Eusapia, but those present at Cambridge came to the conclusion, on what appeared to them to be an adequate trial, that there was clear evidence of trickery on the part of Eusapia, although Sir Oliver Lodge adhered to his opinion that the phenomena he witnessed in the He Roubaud were genuine.

This opinion was corroborated by that of the eminent physiologist. Professor Charles Richet. After the seances at Cambridge he for a time suspended his judgment, but subsequently, both in conversation with myself and on other occasions, has stated that he was absolutely convinced of the super-normal character of some of the manifestations which occur with Eusapia. This also was the opinion of the well-known astronomical writer,

1 See "Journal of the S.P.R.," Vol. VI, p. 306.

2 ibid.. Vol. VII, p. 148.

3 ibid., p. 135.

Camille Flammarion, who in his work, "Les Forces Naturelles Inconnues," deals at length with the phenomena occurring with Eusapia, and is convinced of their super-normal character.

But the most remarkable testimony in favour of Eusapia came from some of the leading scientific men of Italy, men specially trained in the investigation of psychological and physiological phenomena. Perhaps the most notable witness was the late Professor Lombroso, who conducted the investigation of Eusapia's powers in his laboratory in the University of Turin, every precaution being taken against fraud. The result was that Lombroso publicly bore witness to the genuineness of these extraordinary physical manifestations. The opinion of so experienced and able a criminologist as Lombroso — whose high scientific status is recognised throughout Europe — necessarily carried great weight. In an article published in 1908 in the "Annals of Psychical Science," Lombroso refers to various phases of these phenomena, including phantasms and apparitions of deceased persons. He points out that sometimes several phenomena occurred simultaneously, and hence were beyond the power of one person to perform, and also that there is evidence of the intrusion of another will, which could not be attributed to the medium or to any person present, but which was in opposition to all, and even to the control, "John." He lays stress upon the importance of these facts in relation to the hypothesis that the occurrences are explicable by the "psychic forces" of the medium and circle alone: an hypothesis which at an earlier stage of the enquiry he himself adopted, but which he now regards as inadequate.

Independent testimony came from Dr. Enrico Morselli, Professor of Neurology and Psychiatry (mental therapeutics), in the University of Genoa, who presided over a set of seances with Eusapia in that city.

The control of the medium was very strict. Her hands and feet were held by Dr. Morselli and Sig. Barzini, editor of the "Corriere della Sera," who states that he was present "with the object of unmasking fraud and trickery," but was in the end convinced of the reality of some of the phenomena. The person of the medium was thoroughly searched before the seance, and the room was also searched; the light was never entirely extinguished.

Under these conditions Dr. Morselli testifies to the occurrence of the following phenomena: movements of the table, raps on the table and sounds on musical instruments without contact; complete levitations of the table; movements of objects at a distance from the medium seen in the light, and, also, the operation of selfregistering instruments by the unseen agency; apports, i.e., objects brought into the room from outside; the sound of human voices not proceeding from any visible person; impressions on plastic substances of hands, feet and faces; the appearance of dark prolongations of the medium's body, of well delineated forms of faces, heads and busts. Although entirely sceptical at the outset of his experiments he declares himself convinced that most of the phenomena alleged to occur with Eusapia are "real, authentic, and genuine."

Dr. Morselli was disposed to interpret these phenomena by what he terms the hypothesis of special psychic or bio-dynamic forces; that is to say, he attributes them to some peculiar power emanating from the person of the

* A very full report of these is given in the Annals of Psychical Science for February, March, May, and June, 1907.

medium. This is practically the psychic force theory of many earlier English investigators.

Shortly after the seances held under the direction of Dr. Morselli in the University of Genoa, another series of experiments, in Turin, was conducted by Doctors Herlitzka, C. Foa, and Aggazzotti; Dr. Pio Foa, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, being present at the most remarkable of this set of experiments. The seances yielded similar positive results to those held by Professors Lombroso and Morselli.

Another competent witness is Dr. Giuseppe Venzano, stated by Dr. Morselli to be an "excellent observer." He contributed an important article to the "Annals of Psychical Science" (August and September, 1907), containing a detailed record and critical analysis of his experiences with Eusapia, under conditions of strict control, and sometimes in the full light given by an electric lamp of sixteen-candle power. Dr. Venzano, in the course of his experiments with Eusapia, the light in the room being sufficient to enable both the medium and his fellow-sitters to be clearly seen, perceived a woman's form beside him, felt her touch and heard her speak; the form spoke with fulness of detail of certain family affairs not known to anyone present except himself. The whole incident is a most amazing one, and Dr. Venzano states that, in his opinion, any explanation of this experience based on the possibility of fraud or of hallucination is impossible.

Professor Philippe Bottazzi, Director of the Physiological Institute at the University of Naples, having read the report of Dr. Morselli's experiments at Genoa, made an attempt to verify the phenomena by means of

Assistants of Professor Mosso, an eminent physiologist.

3i6 Appendix C an elaborate and carefully arranged set of self-registering instruments, in the hope of obtaining an automatic graphic record of the psychic force exercised by the medium. Such a record would negative the hypothesis of hallucination or misdescription on the part of the observer. These important experiments, carried out with the collaboration of several able professors of the same University, were remarkably successful, and Professor Bottazzi's article concludes by stating that these experiments have "eliminated the slightest trace of suspicion or uncertainty relative to the genuineness of the phenomena. We obtained the same kind of assurance as that which we have concerning physical, chemical, or physiological phenomena. From henceforth sceptics can only deny the facts by accusing us of fraud and charlatanism."

In 1909 three members of the S.P.R., the Hon. Everard Feilding, Mr. W. W. Baggally and Mr. Hereward Carrington were commissioned by the Society to carry out another serious investigation with this medium. The selection was specially made with a view to the qualifications of the investigators, Mr. Carrington was a clever amateur conjuror, and for ten years had carried on investigations on these physical phenomena in the United States. His book on this subject shows his familiarity with the methods adopted by fraudulent mediums and his cautious attitude towards all such experiences. Mr. Baggally was also an amateur conjuror with much experience, and had come to a negative conclusion as to the possibility of any genuine physical pheno-

See Annals of Psychical Science, September, 1907, p. 149; October, 1907, p. 260; December, 1907, p. 377; where a full account of these experiments will be found, with illustrations showing the tracings made by the self-registering instruments.

mena. Mr. Feildlng's attitude was the same, and, moreover, he had had extensive experience in investigating physical phenomena.

The result of this investigation vias that all three of these well qualified men were convinced of the absolute genuineness of the remarkable super-normal phenomena they witnessed at their hotel in Naples. Since then they have had another series of seances which yielded quite different results and in which they obtained nothing convincingly super-normal and much that was obviously normal and probably spurious. The same thing was also found in sittings with Eusapia in America.

How can we reconcile these conflicting results? I am not concerned to defend Eusapia, on the contrary I am more disposed to loathe her, but we must be fair, and give even the devil his due. Like other psychics, especially those who exhibit similar amazing super-normal phenomena, she is most sensitive to "suggestion," even when unexpressed; and in the trance, when her consciousness and self-control are largely inhibited, she is the easy prey of external influences. In the absence of the steadying though subconscious, influence of a high moral nature, she unblushingly cheats whenever the conditions are unfavourable for the production of super-normal phenomena. We have no right to assume that she is wholly conscious of so doing, for Professor Hyslop has shown that mediumship is often accompanied with abnormal bodily as well as mental conditions. We know little or nothing of what constitutes the peculiar faculty or environment for the necessary production of these physical phenomena.

If they are due, as some have thought, to an externalizatlon of the nerve force of the psychic, it Is not improbable that the degree of this externalization will vary

with the favourable or unfavourable mental state of those present. We may even conceive that when this psychic force is restricted or not externalized, it may create movements of the limbs of the psychic which will cause her to perform by normal actions (in perhaps a semi-conscious state) what under good psychical conditions would be done super-normally. This would produce the impression of intentional fraud. Every one who has had much experience in these perplexing investigations knows that what seems purposeless and stupid fraud often intrudes itself, after the most conclusive evidence of genuine phenomna has been obtained. It is this which renders the whole enquiry wholly unfitted for the hasty and unskilled investigator.



Appendix D. Suggestions for Investigators in Conducting Psychical Experiments

There are many earnest enquirers who wish to know how to conduct experiments for the investigation of psychical phenomena, and a few suggestions to this end may therefore be useful.



(1) Thought-transference.

Although the evidence for telepathy is both abundant and weighty, additional evidence is always welcome especially with a view to a better knowledge of the conditions of success. A recent paper by Professor Gilbert Murray, Litt. D., giving a record of his own successful experiments, in guessing incidents thought of by others, should be read in this connection; it will be found in the "Proceedings of the S.P.R." for Nov., 1916. Professor Murray points out how important it is to avoid tedium and lack of interest in all concerned in the experiment. Hence experiments in guessing a card or a number, though useful and necessary for statistical purposes, soon bore and weary the percipient, defeating the end in view. In my original experiments with the children of the Rev. A. M. Creery, 35 years ago, I found the same thing; and in the report of these experiments which Myers, Gurney, and myself published in the first volume of the Proceedings S. P. R. (1882) we stated that the more varied the experiments were made the better were the results obtained. Always remember that the essential thing is to keep alive the interest of the percipient.

Further, it is necessary to avoid distraction of the mind, or any disturbances, and also emphatically to avoid any special anxiety for success. Make the conditions as stringent as possible, but at the same time endeavour to conduct the experiments as if they were an amusing game. Nor should the agents, — that is the persons who have selected the subject to be guessed, — mentally exert themselves as if they were studying a difficult proposition. It is not the conscious part of our personality that is effective, but the sub-conscious; possibly thought transference occurs universally. If this is so it would appear that only in a limited number of persons does the telepathic impact emerge into the consciousness of the percipient. In this emergence delay often occurs, hence all the "guesses" should be noted down, as occasionally it will be found that an earlier impression emerges in place of, or with, a later one.

Again Professor Murray confirms what I noticed long ago, that when the "agent" holds the hand of the percipient very often better results are obtained. This is worth further investigation, care being taken to avoid anything like "muscle reading" or hyper-sesthesia.

A series of experiments should not be continued too long at one time, as sometimes it is found the trials tire or exhaust the percipient. Some correspondents have told me the experiments produce giddiness, etc. (see note on p. 57, "Proc. S.P.R.," Vol. I). But I myself have never noticed this, nor seen any ill effects from these experiments, nor from experiments on "dowsing" (see Chap. 8 of my little book on Psychical Research, Home University Library).



(2) The Dowsing Rod and the Pendule Explorateur.

Various autoscopes, as I have called them, can be used to reveal involuntary muscular action on the part of the automatist. The forked dowsing rod is the simplest and most widely successful, but the twisting of the rod is no evidence of any super-normal faculty, nor does it imply success in the discovery of underground water or metallic ores. Its movement is due to involuntary and unconscious muscular action, and may be caused by any sub-conscious suggestion arising in the mind of the dowser.

The same explanation covers the motion of the so-called pendule explorateur, a ring or other small object suspended by a thread held between the fingers of one hand; or passed over the ball of the thumb, the elbow resting on the table. An alphabet arranged in a circle round the pendule, will enable words to be spelt out as the pendule swings to each letter. It is tedious, but very amusing and curious results sometimes are found; unexpected messages and answers to questions may be given. If the holder of the pendule be blindfolded and the alphabet re-arranged, it will be seen how much is due to his unconscious muscular action and involuntary mental guidance.

In both these cases, however, as in the use of all other autoscopes, certain persons will be found who

1 Two centuries ago the forked dowsing-rod was used for the same purpose and messages purporting to come from different planets were recorded!

possess super-normal power, and the results so obtained cannot be explained away by any human faculty hitherto recognized by official science. In the case of the good dowser, — who may be a child or wholly unlettered person of either sex, or a distinguished man like the late Mr. A. Lang or others of note, — the faculty of clairvoyance reveals itself, not by a conscious perception but by an automatic action such as the twisting of the rod, whenever the object of search is found; whether it be a hidden coin, or underground spring, or metallic lode. On the continent the pendule is often used for the same purpose, but when messages are spelt out by its means the explanation falls under the next heading.



(3) Automatic Writing, the Ouija Board, etc.

Here we come to a branch of psychical research which probably excites the most interest, and in which caution is necessary. Those who are new to the subject should read the suggestions given in Chapter XX and refer to p. xviii of the Preface. Young persons, and those who have little to interest or employ their time and thoughts, should be strongly discouraged from making any experiments in this perplexing region.

Moreover, it not infrequently happens, as some friends of mine found, that after some interesting and veridical messages and answers to questions had been given, mischievous and deceptive communications took place, interspersed with profane and occasionally obscene language. How far the sitters' subliminal self is responsible for this, it is difficult to say; they were naturally disquieted and alarmed, as the ideas and words were wholly foreign to their thoughts, and they threw up the whole matter in disgust.

With this preliminary caution, and urging all investigators to preserve a sane and critical spirit, the best results can be obtained when two or more friends agree to sit regularly at some convenient and quiet hour. A pencil may be held on a sheet of paper or a planchette used or the ouija board, already described p. 176.'This last autoscope usually furnishes the easiest, though the most tedious, mode of automatic action. It has also the advantage that the person, or two persons, who touch the travelling indicator, can be carefully blindfolded and the alphabet re-arranged without their knowledge. If messages can thus be obtained, the conscious, or unconscious and unintentional, movement of the Indicator by the sitters, can thus be eliminated more or less perfectly.

If after a few trials no results are obtained the circle should be changed and others allowed to try. When any messages are received, it is well to question the unseen intelligence and ascertain what are the best conditions and who is the most promising medium. Unwearied patience and regular sittings will be found necessary to obtain the best results. Whether the game Is worth the candle, the enquirers must decide for themselves; personally I don't think it Is, except for those engaged In purely psychological Investigation.



(4) Physical Phenomena.

These are less easy to obtain; though table-tilting and the movements of other objects touched by the sitters often occur, and may usually be traced to the unconscious and Involuntary muscular action of the sitters. Raps and the movement of objects without

1 This board can be obtained for a few shillings from the office of Light, no, St, Martin's Lane, London, W.C.

contact, cannot be so explained; nor can all of the remarkable motions of bodies which occur with contact. This will be clear from a perusal of Chapters IV and V dealing with physical phenomena. When raps first occur in a private circle, they are usually very faint ticks, and grow in loudness and frequency with continued sittings.

Perhaps the best rules for the conduct of circles sitting for spiritistic phenomena are those long ago published by "M.A.(Oxon)" — the Rev. Stainton Moses. After instructing sitters to place their hands flat on the upper surface of the table round which they sit, he goes on to say: —

"Do not concentrate attention too fixedly on the expected manifestation. Engage in cheerful but not frivolous conversation. Avoid dispute or argument. Scepticism has no deterrent effect, but a bitter spirit of opposition in a person of determined will may totally stop or decidedly impede manifestations. If conversation flags, music is a great help, if it be agreeable to all, and not of a kind to irritate the sensitive ear. Patience is essential, and it may be necessary to meet ten or twelve times at short intervals, before anything occurs. If after such a trial you still fail, form a fresh circle. An hour should be the limit of an unsuccessful seance.

"If the table moves, let your pressure be so gentle on its surface that you are sure you are not aiding its motions. After some time you will probably find that the movement will continue if your hands are held over, but not in contact with, it. Do not, however, try this until the movement is assured, and be in no hurry to get messages.

"When you think that the time has come, let someone take command of the circle and act as spokesman. Explain to the unseen Intelligence that an agreed code of signals is desirable, and ask that a tilt may be given as the alphabet is slowly repeated, at the several letters which form the word that the Intelligence wishes to spell. It is convenient to use a single tilt for No, three for Yes, and two to express doubt or uncertainty.

"When a satisfactory communication has been established, ask if you are rightly placed, and if not, what order you should take. After this ask who the Intelligence purports to be, which of the company is the medium, and such relevant questions. If you only satisfy yourself at first that it is possible to speak with an Intelligence separate from that of any perso» present, you will have gained much.

"The signals may take the form of raps. If so, use the same code of signals, and ask as the raps become clear that they may be made on the table, or in a part of the room where they are demonstrably not produced by any natural means, but avoid any vexatious imposition of restrictions on free communication. Let the Intelligence use its own means. It rests greatly with the sitters to make the manifestations elevating or frivolous and even tricky.

"Should an attempt be made to entrance the medium, or to manifest by any violent methods, ask that the attempt may be deferred till you can secure the presence of some experienced Spiritualist. If this request is not heeded, discontinue the sitting. The process of developing a trance-medium is one that might disconcert an inexperienced enquirer.

"Lastly, try the results you get by the light of Reason. Maintain a level head and a clear judgment. Do not believe everything you are told, for though the great unseen world contains many a wise and discerning spirit, it also has in it the accumulation of human folly, vanity, and error; and this lies nearer to the surface than that which is wise and good. Distrust the free use of great names. Never for a moment abandon the use of your reason. Do not enter into a serious investigation in a spirit of idle curiosity or frivolity. Cultivate a reverent desire for what is pure, good, and true. You will be repaid if you gain only a well-grounded conviction that there is a life after death, for which a pure and good life before death is the best and wisest preparation."

The concluding sentence above must be read in connection with the various theories of these physical phenomena which I have given in Chapter IX. For my own part I consider all these manifestations are so closely associated with the subliminal self of the medium, that it would be rash to infer they proceed from a discarnate human personality; though the Russian case cited on p. 229, as well as Rev. S. Moses' own experience, supports the view that in some cases they may do so.

As a rule the higher and more spiritual the content of the messages, the less palpable and material is their manifestation. The silent "communion of saints" is very far removed from a spiritistic seance. Telepathic such communion may be, and probably is, but, as the mystics in all ages have taught, calmness of body and mind is essential,

"Some have striven Achieving calm, to whom was given The joy that mixes man with Heaven."

And "Into that silent heaven the Great Soul floweth in," as Plotinus tells us.

