d. Mediums are put by the spirit which has taken possession of them, into a state analogous to that of a magnetized person. To all questions addressed verbally or mentally to the spirit which possesses them they respond sometimes by knocks struck in the hand or by gestures, sometimes in running the finger over the letters of an alphabet which has been presented to them.

e. There are mediums who, enjoying, in the state of wakefulness, magnetic clairvoyance, see the spirits and hear them; others recount with minute details the visions which the spirit which has taken possession of them offers them.

f. Mediums reproduce with the greatest fidelity the traits of the figure, the sound of the voice, the attitude, the gesture of persons whom they have never seen, it is assured.

g. Mediums are singers.

h. There are others who devote themselves with ardour to the exercise of dance.

198. Mediums considered in their ensemble represent all the faculties that antiquity and the middle ages have accorded to certain men to know the past, the present and the future, either by whatsoever inspirations emanated from purely spiritual beings, or by theurgic ceremonies or magical operations. With this power of faculties, it is not astonishing that mediums are consulted on all things and on all the acts of private and public life: thus they are so for births, marriages, deaths, inclinations of the heart, lawsuits, banking operations, the means to conserve one's health and to re-establish it if it has been troubled.

199. It is a question now of saying how tables intervene in the history of which I have just exposed the summary. Have they made the spirits discovered? or are the spirits who have indicated the tables as the most efficacious intermediaries to assure their communication with man? This question is all the more interesting to resolve for the history of the discoveries of the human spirit, that a grave author has said: "If the tables respond on the questions of the past, of the present, of the future, it is a physical and moral phenomenon as great, greater perhaps, than that resolved by Newton." I share this opinion, but before concluding definitively, there is an if to remove; consequently I will not conclude before it has been crossed out of the proposition.

Whatever it may be, if the writings which I have under my eyes are exact, man will not have to pride himself on the discovery of striking tables, the mediums warn us of it: modest as they are, they recognize the first to owe all to the spirit which possesses them; absolutely passive, the spirit directs at its pleasure their words, their writings and their designs as their actions. In the eyes of morality, of intelligence, of taste and of politeness, they have no right to praise, but also they are exempt from blame.

200. The mediums agree to owe to the spirits the idea of spiritual circles, that is to say of the association of several persons who form the chain with the hands placed on a table in the intention of making it turn. By the saying of mediums, the spirits love this chain of persons who desire them, especially when they prepare to receive them well by discourses and songs to which they are very sensitive. On another side, it is a very happy occasion for certain persons to discover that they are endowed with the faculty of mediums, and, I repeat it, if mediums have modesty, they are not insensible to money: thenceforth, to learn, in the United States, that one is apt to become one is not an indifferent thing.

201. The spirits are not always disposed to respond to invocations; they let themselves be prayed sometimes, and then it is only after several days that, yielding to the desires of the persons who make the chain, they manifest themselves by some of the phenomena of which I have spoken. Other times they refuse to manifest themselves because of the presence in the circle of a person who displeases them and whom one could qualify as ANTI-MEDIUM.

202. I hope the believers in the science of mediums will not accuse me of having sought, in the summary I have just drawn, to lower the sublimity of their science, diminish the number of their attainments, or dissimulate the services they can render society as jurisconsults, financiers, physicians, and historians; wishing, however, to be true before all, I am obliged to bring to the eulogy some restrictions, most of which I have borrowed from the very writings of the believers in which I drew the marvellous things I have just recounted.

A. The spirits do not always tell the truth. 203. The spirits' errors on places, times, facts, and persons seem all the graver, more surprising to the believers, because the latter do not doubt the spirits' faculty of recounting the past, seeing the present, and penetrating the future. These errors being a fact, they must throw much uncertainty into the sincere believer who, not trusting his reason to conduct himself and take a resolution, goes to consult some spirit in hope of good counsel. A Parisian table, consulted lately on the sex of a child still in its mother's womb, answered a girl; two days after this answer, the delivery gave the mother a boy.

B. The spirits are not always very intelligent, nor even intelligent. 204. It must be confessed: when one wants to judge the spirits' intelligence by their answers, even when they are true, the answers do not give a very high idea of it. Above all, let us agree that a spirit must have much leisure to be generally ready at every moment convenient to idlers, to come and answer on the age of persons, the number of the children, the colour of their hair; whether such a person is absent or at table or in bed; whether she has a pink hat or a green hat; whether she has shoes or boots, etc. If we run through the intellectual works of the spirits, those dictated by tables or even by a simple chair, like those little works in prose or verse that came from the presses of the Government printing office in Guadeloupe, of which I spoke above, it must be confessed that pure spirits are not of a strength to struggle with spirits united to matter whose intellectual works we possess; yet it would seem, in the view of those spiritualists whose disdain for matter is so profound, that the former should have a marked superiority over the latter.

C. The spirits are not always moral, nor polite, nor of good taste in their language. 205. Without entering into any detail concerning the manner of seeing of many mediums or spirits in fact of the political and social constitution of the human species, I shall confine myself to saying that these mediums or spirits make light of the family; and that has nothing astonishing for whoever knows what they recount of the life of spirits separated from the body, who arrive in heaven only after passing through successive spheres where all the carnal appetites are satisfied as soon as conceived. Moreover, their love of corporeal enjoyments is perfectly in accord with the cynicism of the talk and the obscenity of the grossest discourses many of these spirits hold.

206. If the American spirits have often sinned against good taste and the language of polite society, one must not accuse American societies as less advanced or less well chosen than French societies; for the following fact proves there would be error. In a salon of the Paris quarter most renowned for worldly wit, good taste of language, and politeness of manners, there were two young women, as witty as beautiful, forming the chain on an elegant pedestal table. To judge by the rapidity of the movement, the spirit animating the furniture seemed happy to satisfy these gracious persons' desire, at the same time as it seemed to feel the sweetness of four hands of dazzling whiteness with which it communicated, when, to a question as simple as amiable addressed to it by one of these persons, it answered with a word I cannot write, but which was worse than any of those Ver-Vert gathered in his fatal voyage from Nevers to Nantes. Error! if one excused the spirit by attributing a distraction to it; the word the pen refuses to write was indeed said with intention; for these ladies, far from the answer, thinking they had not heard it, begged the spirit kindly to repeat it. This time the word was pronounced in a perfectly clear manner; the chain broke and the pedestal table ceased to turn…. There are therefore in Paris ill-bred and coarse spirits, just as in America!



Part Four: Theory and Conclusions of the Facts Set Forth in the First Three Parts



Chapter I: Exposition of the Principle of M. Chevreul Concerning a Particular Class of Muscular Movements

207. It is now a question of bringing together facts disseminated in the first three parts of this work, in order to show their analogy and then to deduce conclusions interesting enough to justify the trouble I have taken to unite them, and the time the reader has had the patience to give to their development. The principle I formulated in these terms in the introduction, concerning the development in us of a muscular action that is not the product of a will, but the result of a thought bearing on a phenomenon of the external world, without preoccupation with the muscular action indispensable to the manifestation of the phenomenon, will serve as a rallying centre to the disseminated facts to which I allude; and in order to prevent all equivocation and avoid a periphrasis, I shall designate it henceforth by the expression principle of the explorer pendulum. The word explorer, given by Gerboin to the pendulum I used, will prevent it being confused with the ordinary pendulum. This principle is not a simple conjecture, nor even an induction, but a proposition deduced from the observation of several experimental facts, controlled by experiments instituted in consequence; so that it acquired for me the generality of a principle only after this verification.

208. That is what must be developed, so that my explanations show themselves what they really are: the expression of the experimental method, and not suppositions devoid of proof. Let us recapitulate the facts. Witness first of the experiment of the pendulum called explorer, executed by M. Deleuze, I reproduced it almost at once. That is Fortis' and Ch. Amoretti's experiment repeated. I ask myself whether such a body will make the pendulum oscillate from right to left. And the movement takes place in that sense. I ask myself whether such a body will make the pendulum oscillate from left to right. And the movement takes place in that sense.

209. Seeing the pendulum oscillate above certain bodies, I ask myself whether such another body interposed between them will not make the movement cease. And the movement stops.

210. What had I done? I had repeated experiments my eyes had just seen, and I had imagined others which had the success of the first. It remained to know whether the new experiments were a proof of those preceding them, or whether at bottom they were only a simple extension of them, so that they taught nothing new on the cause sought. They were effectively only a simple extension, for they led to no conclusion on the fundamental question — that of knowing whether the pendulum's movement depended at once on two causes: on a body placed beneath it and on the man holding its thread between his fingers. Evidently, had my experiments been continued in the direction of which I speak, without previously resolving the question whether there really exist dynamic bodies and adynamic bodies in relation to the pendulum, I would have reproduced in 1812, without my knowledge, the book Gerboin had printed four years earlier.

211. But, preoccupied from that epoch with the utility of methods and with the necessity of resting on principles whose certainty, once demonstrated, serves as a conducting thread to discover the truths one seeks, I proceeded as I had already done, and as I have continued to do, in my researches in chemistry, in physiology, and in psychology.

212. In reflecting on what is strange in the supposition by which one attributes to inorganic bodies, as to living bodies, the power of acting at a distance on the explorer pendulum; in reflecting on what had happened in me when my eyes followed its oscillations, I was conscious of a sort of pleasure caused by the sight of the pendulum's oscillations, and of a tendency of my body to follow the line of movement that captivated my eyes…

213. These reflections led me to the experiment with the eyes closed, that is to say to an experiment very well suited to demonstrate the influence of certain bodies on the pendulum, if that influence existed. Evidently for me, in the affirmative case, the bodies capable of exercising it had to act just as well when the experimenter's eyes were closed as when they were open, and, in both cases, the bodies endowed with the adynamic property had likewise, by their presence, to stop the movement of the pendulum. But, the contrary having happened, that is to say all the phenomena attributed to an action of the bodies having vanished when my eyes had been bandaged, it is impossible to admit that, in the case where the experimenter's eyes are open, the bodies exert an action that they no longer exert in the contrary case.

214. What objection can be made to me?

What influence could sight exercise if the movement of the pendulum were produced at once by a body and by a fluid that was within us?

Evidently none.

Am I the only one from whom a bandage over the eyes took away the faculty of acting on the pendulum? No. General Planta, a great partisan of magnetism, in the presence of MM. Ampère, Ballanche and Dugas-Montbel, the translator of Homer, after having shown us the pendulum oscillating from right to left and from left to right, according to the finger of the free hand that he presented to it, was stupefied when he had recognized his powerlessness after his eyes had ceased to see the oscillations of the pendulum.

The experiment that had succeeded for me, repeated by a true believer in magnetism, therefore gave in both cases one and the same result.

These facts, perfectly established, authorize me to affirm the exactness of what I have written. It is for persons opposed to my manner of seeing to show where the inexactness of my experiments and the error of my reasonings lie. Whatever they do, whatever they say, they will not change conclusions that rest on such bases.

215. I insist on the difference between these facts and the acts that I execute under the influence of a thought that is a will.

I am thirsty: a glass of water on a table strikes my eyes; I bring my hand near to it, I open it, my fingers apply themselves to the glass, they press it, and from that moment I seize it and carry it to my mouth; I incline it, and when it is empty, I put it back on the table.

There is a series of actions of which each is the effect of my will.

My will commanded my muscles, and my muscles, under the immediate influence of my nerves, executed all the movements necessary to the grasping of the glass, to its translation from the table to my mouth without spilling a drop of the water it contained, to its inclination in order to empty it, finally to its translation from my mouth to the table.

The ignorant man executes the whole of these actions just as well as the learned man. If he does not give himself an account of each of them as the latter does, he has consciousness of the obedience of his arm and of his hand to his will.

216. Well, in the actions that I bring back to the principle that I have laid down, nothing indicates a will like the one that presides so incontestably over the accomplishment of the preceding acts.

Indeed, when I repeated the experiment of which M. Deleuze had made me a witness, my intention, my very desire to see the pendulum oscillate between my fingers, was not a will commanding my muscles; for had this will existed in me, there would have been no more experiment. My will therefore could not be to put the pendulum in motion; my will was the execution of an experiment well suited to put an end to the uncertainty of my mind on the question of knowing whether the pendulum would be moved or whether it would remain at rest.

The same state of things and the same result, when, during the oscillations of a pendulum that I held above mercury, I asked myself whether, by interposing a certain body between them, the movement would cease. This question, which I addressed to myself, was incompatible with a will that would have commanded my muscles.

217. I cited the rod, in my Letter to M. Ampère, as having to present facts analogous to those of the pendulum, and, consequently, susceptible of being interpreted in the same manner; but it was only an induction, for I had not yet occupied myself with the occult sciences. Today, when I have studied them, and when the writings examined in the Ist and IInd parts of this work are familiar to me, I shall show that this induction can be perfectly justified.



Chapter II: Application of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum to Experiments Made Before 1812 with That Pendulum

218. The passage of Ammianus Marcellinus, reproduced earlier (158), whatever its obscurity may be, offers proof that the exploring pendulum was employed in the divinatory art in the IVth century.

219. The exploring pendulum of which Father Schott speaks was composed of a thread and certainly of a ring. Did this latter have some relation to the constellated rings? I do not know. Whatever it may be, it was an instrument of divination. When the ring was held suspended in a glass or a cup, it struck a certain number of blows against the wall of the vase in answer to the questions addressed to it, absolutely as the talking tables of today do. The passage of the Physica curiosa, by Father Schott, that I have cited (1), teaches that use was made of it to know what hour it is.

(1) See the note on page 138.

Between the fingers of a person of good faith, the pendulum struck a certain number of blows, conformably, according to me, to a thought that was not a will, but a simple presumption of the real hour; or else, if the presumption did not exist, a circumstance independent of a determined conjecture determined the number of the blows: for example, some physical disposition of the fingers that lasted only a moment, a fortuitous circumstance, of which the experimenter did not give himself an exact account. What I say is not a vague allegation; they are facts observed on myself.

220. Gerboin's experimental researches come within my explanation. Let them be read attentively and one will be convinced that nothing proves that the phenomena described depend on a fluid, nor that the bodies qualified as dynamic have the least action on the pendulum. Let my observations then be read, and doubtless one will approve me for having said that if I had not followed the precept given by the experimental method, namely: the control of the inductions deduced from my first experiments, I would have remade in 1812 Gerboin's book printed four years earlier.

I shall add, conformably to my manner of seeing, new observations and some citations from Gerboin's book.

221. Gerboin, after having observed that the pendulum held above a disk of zinc describes a cone in going from left to right, whereas above a disk of silver it describes it in going from right to left (pp. 35 and 36), says (note pp. 45 and 46): "... In all those (the experiments) that will not demand a particular form of movement, one will seek to bring about a regular circular movement; to this effect, one may place below the pendulum a disk of zinc or of silver."

In formerly doing this experiment, I established that the nature of the bodies was indifferent, provided that they presented a round form. Thus the experiment repeated with disks of various metals, cakes of resin, disks of glass, circles of paper and of cardboard, and a simple circular line traced on a board, always succeeded. My intention was evidently to observe conical oscillations, or, what comes to the same thing, to see the pendulum describe circles. Well, sight fixed on a circular form determined the muscular movement proper to effect it.

222. Gerboin reports an experiment different from the preceding, but which is altogether analogous to it by the explanation that it suggested to me, although I did not repeat it.

A disk of silver or of zinc is placed at 38 centimetres from a voltaic couple, silver and zinc; the pendulum is held suspended between them. The movement becomes circular, because the pile has more intensity, according to Gerboin, than the disk. But if one superposes on this latter a second disk that makes of it a voltaic couple identical to the first, the pendulum, equally attracted by the two piles, will oscillate in the vertical plane that separates them, and the oscillations will no longer be conical, but plane.

According to me, the pile, no more than a single disk, has any action on the pendulum. But Gerboin having thought that the first had to prevail in power over the second, the movement took place conformably to this thought. In the second experiment, suggested by the idea of equality of power of two similar piles, the movement, conformably to the idea, had to proceed from a mean action whose consequence for Gerboin was plane oscillations, and let us note in addition that sight directed the movement that thought conceived as possible.

223. Gerboin says that the oscillations cease when one closes the eyes abruptly, a result conformable to my observation; but the consequence of this fact

is far from having been for him what it has been for me. The reason for it is simple. Gerboin made this experiment according to a preconceived theory, so true in his eyes that all his researches had only one aim, that of extending it; and always before executing an experiment he had the thought or the intention of obtaining such a result, whereas in making this experiment my aim was the control of an induction deduced from earlier experiments.

224. Gerboin's book, just as much as that of M. de Tristan, are among the facts best suited, to my knowledge, to demonstrate that experiments undertaken and continued without the spirit of criticism only remove the experimenter further and further from the truth, because each experiment that a certain thought prompts in him, being only the development of that thought, must in his mind only add to his conviction, whereas in reality it is an error added to another.

225. At a time when I did not know the writings on the divining rod whose analysis was the object of the first part of this work, I said in the Letter of 1833, in the Revue des Deux-Mondes:

"It is in this that the phenomena that I have described seem to me to be of some interest for psychology and even for the history of the sciences; they prove how easy it is to take illusions for realities, whenever we occupy ourselves with a phenomenon in which our organs have some part, and that in circumstances that have not been sufficiently analyzed. Indeed, had I limited myself to making the pendulum oscillate above certain bodies, and to the experiments in which its oscillations were stopped when glass, resin, etc., were interposed between the pendulum and the bodies that seemed to determine its movement, and certainly I would have had no reason not to believe in the divining rod and in other things of the same kind. Now one will conceive without difficulty how men of very good faith, and enlightened moreover, are sometimes led to have recourse to altogether chimerical ideas to explain phenomena that do not really go out of the physical world that we know (1)."

(1) Note of the Letter: "I conceive very well that a man of good faith, whose whole attention is fixed on the movement that a rod he holds in his hands can take by a cause unknown to him, will be able to receive from the least circumstance the tendency to the movement necessary to bring about the manifestation of the phenomenon that occupies him; for example, if this man is seeking a spring, if he does not have his eyes bandaged, the sight of abundant green turf, on which he walks, will be able to determine in him, without his knowledge, the muscular movement capable of disturbing the rod, by the liaison established between the idea of active vegetation and that of water (*)."

() Revue des Deux-Mondes*, issue of 1 May 1833.

226. This bringing together of the phenomena of the exploring pendulum with those of the rod had been made before me by Gerboin, in terms that I reproduce faithfully:

"Now, if one examines the instrument designated by the name, so little philosophical, of divining rod, one will find that its nature and its object bring it closer, up to a certain point, to the exploring apparatus. The first of these instruments owes the activity that is proper to it to the motor impression that it receives from a fluid that the body of man transmits to it, an impression that is linked to its form and to its chemical composition, and that varies according to the state of the bodies above which it is sustained. Now, all these characters are found again in the constitution of the organo-electric pendulum. The circumstance that best distinguishes these machines is that the second presents in its operations a greater diversity of forms and dimensions that render them more commensurable. It must be added that the pendular apparatus, enjoying a higher degree of mobility, and its action being susceptible of being excited by a greater number of persons, the use of this means becomes more extended, at the same time as it offers results more precise and easier to observe (1)."

(1) Recherches expérimentales sur un nouveau mode de l'action électrique; by Gerboin; page 242.

Thus the analogy of the two orders of phenomena that struck Gerboin's mind as it did mine, despite the extreme difference of our respective interpretations, is certainly a motive for believing in its reality.

Finally, before me, before Gerboin, Ritter considered the divining rod as a double pendulum that, to be put in movement, needs only a force superior to that which produces the effects that have just been described.

227. Is my manner of seeing not confirmed today in every point by the passages that I have borrowed from the writings examined in the Ist part of this work? This is what I shall develop by bringing my words close to these passages; but first of all, let us establish my starting point, by recalling the consequences to which the critical examination of these writings has led me.

228. If some authors have advanced that certain bodies, particularly metals, exercised on the rod, without intermediary, an influence capable of putting it in movement, the greatest number, while recognizing this movement as real, admitted its manifestation only on condition of the intervention of the hands of man. It is Kircher who demonstrated, by experiment, that metals do not act on a rod in equilibrium on a pivot (95, pp. 76 and 77).

229. In proportion as one studies the writings of the XVIIth century on the movement of the rod, one sees the part of matter, namely that which one is seeking, and the very matter of the rod, lose more and more of the influence that theory accords them relative to the man who holds it; whereas the influence attributed to thought grows more and more, and thus seems to draw nearer to the ancient times when the rod was an instrument of divination or of magic, or again a simple sign of power.

230. Indeed, it is from the XVth century that one finds the first written mention of the use of the rod to discover metals (56), and it is in 1630 that the use made of it in Germany in the search for subterranean waters was learned in France (58). The movement of the rod was generally attributed to an occult cause, a sympathy supposed to exist between the subterranean matter and the rod, until 1679, when M. de Saint-Romain, in his book La Science naturelle dégagée des chimères de l'école (61), attributed it to effluvia of spirits or of corpuscles, conformably to the ideas of Cartesian philosophy. This explanation was adopted by the Abbé de Lagarde and by Drs. Chauvin and Garnier, and the Abbé de Vallemont (78); evidently it brought the effects of the rod closer to the effects whose study is within the province of physics properly so called. It was then, from the month of August 1692 to April 1693, that the part of influence that was made, in the XVIIth century, to matter in the phenomenon of the rod was the greatest possible.

231. But from the month of July of the year 1689 (64), Father Lebrun began, in his first Letter to Father Malebranche, to put forward an opinion that was to overturn the Cartesian explanation of the movement of the rod. This opinion was founded principally on consideration of the diversity of the cases that were cited in which the rod had made known things of the moral world that one wanted to know, just as well as it made one discover metals, waters, etc. It is thus that from 1689 Father Lebrun, Father Malebranche, the Abbé de la Trappe, M. de Rancé, and the Abbé Pirot all agreed to seek the cause of the movement outside the physical world, at least as regards the cases where the rod turns on things of the moral world.

232. It is in the last half of the year 1692 that public attention was turned to the divining rod because of the use that J. Aymar had made of it to discover the assassins of the wine merchant of Lyon and of his wife, and, as we have seen, it is on this occasion that the Cartesian theory of the corpuscles of M. de Saint-Romain was again put forward by the Abbé de Lagarde, Drs. Chauvin and Garnier, and the Abbé de Vallemont, and that it was combated by Father Lebrun, strengthened by the support of Father Malebranche and of the Abbés de Rancé and Pirot (94). A year later (1694), Father Ménestrier professed the opinion of Father Lebrun (113, 114, 115).

I shall return to their writings only to show how the influence attributed to matter in the movement of the rod weakened, and how the part of the influence of thought went on increasing until 1702.



Chapter III: Application of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum to the Simple Movement of the Rod

233. From the moment one believed in the influence of moral things on the rod's movement, the influence of matter in the phenomenon had to lose importance; and Jacques Aymar's affirmation, that in his hands the rod turned only over what he had the intention of finding, certainly contributed to accrediting that opinion. Effectively, if one admitted as fact that J. Aymar discovered the trace of the authors of the Lyon murder, one had to recognise that, passing through places where metals, waters, etc., exist, in going from Lyon to Beaucaire, then from Lyon to Toulon and from Toulon to the frontier, those bodies had lost all action on the rod. The same conclusion when at Lyon his rod turned over the billhook that had served in perpetrating the crime, while it stayed motionless over two similar billhooks formed, however, of iron which in ordinary cases acted on it. Finally, the influence of matter in the phenomenon was further diminished when J. Aymar said the sensations he experienced were such that he could dispense with the rod.

234. The history of Mlle Ollivet and that of Mlle Martin, which I recounted after Father Lebrun, are real experiments putting beyond all discussion the influence of thought on the rod's movement, as I have already remarked (§104).

History of Mlle Ollivet (§102). First fact: Mlle Ollivet had the uncontested reputation of making the rod turn over metals, springs, etc. Second fact: Scruples come to her from what she hears said of Satan's intervention in the rod's movement. She asks God, at the altar, to lose her power if this intervention is real. After which the rod ceases to turn where it turned before. Conclusion: In a first period, she had the thought that the rod turned over certain bodies, and the rod turned. In a second period, she had the thought that the rod could not turn, according to the scruples she had formed, and the rod turned no more. Are these not exactly the same facts as those I observed when I asked myself whether such a body would set the pendulum in movement, whether such a body would stop it (§§208–209)?

History of Mlle Martin (§105). 235. The history of Mlle Martin, with some more particulars, is similar to that of Mlle Ollivet; and I recall it is preceded by this remark of her historian Father Lebrun, that the cause making the rod turn accommodates itself to men's desires and follows their intentions (§104). First fact: Mlle Martin, like Mlle Ollivet, had the uncontested reputation of making the rod turn over metals, springs, etc. She recounts that, seeing clearly that relics must have more virtue than all that, she tried, and succeeded. Second fact: Father Lebrun having told her that intention would suffice to make the rod turn, she made new trials on reliquaries and on some pieces of metal, and the rod turned or stayed motionless according as she desired it. Finally, the Abbé de Lescot and the father superior of the Oratory, Cavard, having preached to her, she held the rod yet once more over metals and saw without emotion that it no longer turned for her. Conclusion: identical to the preceding.

History of Prior Barde, of M. du Pernan, canon of Saint-Chef, and of M. Expié. First fact: these three persons made the rod turn. M. Expié, after J. Aymar, was the most renowned for his power. Second fact: after praying God to take away their power if it was illicit, they lost it (§107). Conclusion: identical to the preceding ones.

236. Not all the persons who made the rod turn had the same pretension as J. Aymar; hence the procedure they employed to recognise the nature of a hidden body sensible to the rod: it consisted in putting the rod in contact with a known body. But in speaking of this procedure, I remarked that it fell absolutely outside the domain of science, for some, like Mlle Martin, claimed that in the case of identity of the two bodies the rod's movement is increased, while others, like M. Peisson and the religious person of whom Father Ménestrier speaks, concluded identity from the cessation of the movement. From the scientific standpoint, such results are absurd, because one cannot attribute in the same circumstances two mutually contrary effects to the same cause. But, in making the remark, I engaged to explain them in the most satisfactory manner. The moment has come to fulfil that engagement (§119).

237. The procedure of which I speak was imagined conformably to a certain manner of thinking, and that manner of thinking not being the same for all: Some said: it is corpuscles disengaged from the active matter which, through the intermediary of the man, move the rod; consequently, if you put a piece of the active matter with the rod, the movement will be increased (§127). Others said: it is the sympathy of the matter with the rod that makes it turn, or in other words an attraction; hence, if you put it in contact with a piece of matter identical to that moving it now, the attractive force bearing it toward the hidden matter being satisfied, the movement will stop (§127). Does there exist a more convincing proof of the influence of thought on the rod's movement, whether to increase it or to stop it, than opposed conclusions drawn from one same fact, but conformable to preconceived suppositions?

238. Is it possible now to deny the influence of thought in the manifestation of the rod's phenomena? And when I said, taking the thread of the explorer pendulum between my fingers, "Let us see whether such a body will set the pendulum in movement; let us see whether such a body will stop it," and the results were conformable to what I sought to verify, is there not a perfect analogy between the phenomena of the rod and those of the pendulum? The intention (§105), which is the thought of those who move the rod, is it not even closer to the will than the thought animating me when I asked myself whether such a body would set the pendulum in movement, whether such a body would stop it?

239. If we examine the writings of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in which an opinion very different from ours has been stated, attributing the rod's movement to imponderable effluvia of a magnetic or electric nature, we shall find the facts conformable to my manner of seeing, and we shall certainly find none proving the effluvia's reality.

240. By the confession of Thouvenel and of Fortis, the rod's indications are often uncertain. According to Bleton and Vincent Anfossi, the rod is useless, because they claim to discover what they seek by a sensation independent of the rod. And yet several persons who believe in the rod have remarked in the dowser a certain turn of the hand or a shoulder movement which evidently demonstrates the influence of thought such as I have defined it.

241. In summary, like Fathers Lebrun, Malebranche, Ménestrier and the Abbés de Rancé and Pirot, I have admitted that matter is without effect on the rod, and that the latter's movement is produced by an intelligent cause; but instead of attributing it to the demon, I have made it depend on man's thought (§157). This is the occasion to recall a Letter touching the rod, inserted in the Mercure of February 1693, whose author thought nothing proved the devil's intervention, and that even if one rejected Dr. Chauvin's opinion, one should not adopt the contrary opinion; that it would be reasonable to await an explanation that would bring the rod's phenomena back into the domain of physics. Now, in my view, my explanation has precisely that advantage.

242. I shall conclude this chapter with an examination of what, in the end, is to be believed concerning the real part played by Jacques Aymar in the search for the murderers of the Lyon wine merchant and his wife. After the manifold proofs of the impotence of J. Aymar, operating at the Hôtel de Condé (91), at the Hôtel de Hanover, searching in vain for two days for the thief of the cloth pieces of the merchant Ferouillard (92), finding no water at Chantilly although the river flowed beneath his feet, discovering nothing in the rue Saint-Denis, where a soldier of the watch had just been pierced by fifteen or sixteen sword thrusts, not recognizing at the Châtelet a thief who had just been caught in the very act (95), and after the errors he committed on his return to Grenoble (100), the critic, under the impression of the examination to which M. the Prince had subjected J. Aymar and of the conclusion that he wished to make public (91-93), cannot reasonably admit that in the criminal affair at Lyon there was not illusion on the part of many people, deception on the part of J. Aymar, if the latter had not received information on which he believed he ought to keep absolute silence. In the end, the man who showed himself so impotent at Paris, who on several occasions sought to mislead as to his ignorance and showed himself keen enough for gain, must inspire reasonable minds with many doubts concerning the very extraordinary facts attributed to him in the criminal affair at Lyon with regard to the pursuit of the murderers. From the impotence of J. Aymar at Paris and the lack of delicacy of which he gave proof, I cannot admit the reality of the extraordinary facts of which he is said to be the author, and it is fortunate, for human justice, that Father Ménestrier declared that the judges of Lyon would have no regard for these indications (those of the rod), condemned the tests, and conducted their procedure only upon the interrogations made to the hunchback and upon the evidence of the witnesses who had seen him enter the house (115, page 94).

243. Finally, to support my conclusion, I recall the following facts:

1°. In 1702 one saw, says Father Lebrun, near the town of Salon, wells of frightful depth dug uselessly upon the misleading indications given by the rod (125);

2°. The Maréchal de Boufflers could not procure water on his estate in Picardy, although he had had recourse to M. Legentil, prior of Dorenic, and the latter in several places trembled with fright on seeing the movement of the rod: they dug to 60 feet without finding water (125);

3°. M. de Franciue-Grandmaison, provost of the Île-de-France and intendant of waters, had recourse to a very large number of people reputed skilled in handling the rod, notably reverend Capuchin fathers, whether to recognize culprits or to discover springs, and he never found anyone in whom confidence could be placed, because the rod often misled and very often spoke falsely (125);

4°. A young boy, famous at Paris for discovering springs with the rod, was taken onto the passage of the waters of Arcueil and into a garden where metals had been buried, and the rod did not turn. The witnesses were Father Lebrun, de Lahire, M. de Franchie, the abbé de Châteauneuf, the king's lieutenant of Charleroi and a mathematical physicist: that is indeed a true experiment (125);

5°. The illustrious Spallanzani, witness of several experiments which at first appeared extraordinary to him, ended by recognizing that there was nothing real in the cause to which were attributed the movements of the rod that he had been shown (142).



Chapter IV: Application of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum to the Movement of the Rod Employed as a Means of Divination

244. When the mind of man fixes its attention upon some new object, the need to know and to go beyond what he at present perceives excites him to use all the means he believes capable of satisfying his desires. It must be admitted, this need, noble and praiseworthy as long as it is a matter of knowing scientific truth or of extending knowledge of what is useful to society, makes itself felt for idle things which give only simple distractions.

This need of the mind of man to go beyond what at present fixes his attention shows itself in the various applications successively made of the rod. Employed first to discover metals, then springs, etc., it is later employed to discover the displacement of boundary stones of inheritances, criminals, thieves or murderers, etc., and finally things of the moral world. But matter still appears in these last searches, since he who holds the rod presents it above a certain place, above an object, above a man. It is no longer the same in the case where one consults the rod with the intention of knowing a thing of the moral world, independently of the presence of any object or any corporeal being; it is precisely of this case that we are now going to treat, recalling first the three following facts which come under it.

245. First fact. — It is set out in the work of Father Ménestrier and recalled (116).

The person who holds the rod is seated in a place where she cannot be distracted.

I reproduce only a few abridged passages from my quotation.

Q. Is the rod a natural gift?

A. It turns.

Q. Has the demon no part in it?

A. It does not turn.

Q. Is this talent given at birth?

A. It turns.

Q. Does it turn by the constellations?

A. It turns.

Q. Can it cause evil things to be done?

A. It turns.

Q. Can it serve to clarify matters that are doubtful in theology?

A. It turns.

Q. Can it serve to acquire a perfect knowledge of astrology for making almanacs?

A. It turns.

It answers on questions of medicine, on the talents, the capacity of persons, their known or hidden names, their sins and the number of those sins, etc.

It answers when it is asked how an absent person is dressed; it turns on the colour and the form of the garment, etc., etc.

246. Second fact. — It is set out in the Histoire critique des pratiques superstitieuses, etc., of Father Lebrun, and recalled in this work (128).

A priest handles the rod in such a way as to make it answer the questions addressed to it.

It lowers for the affirmative.

It rises for the negative.

It says what absent persons are doing;

Whether a man has money, in what coin and how much.

It answers on the past, the present and the future.

It is a matter of indifference whether one expresses one's request aloud or mentally.

247. Third fact. — It is set out in the Histoire critique des superstitions, of Father Lebrun (128).

Mlle Alloùard is cited for divining with the rod what is happening in very distant places.

248. I do not doubt that the idea of making the rod serve to answer questions put to it was the consequence of a long habit of handling it, or of the strong impression of a mind vividly struck, either by an effect produced by oneself, or by an effect of which one had been the simple witness.

The faculty of making the rod turn in one sense or the other, once acquired, as well as faith in the intelligence of this rod, I explain to myself without difficulty how a question addressed to the person who holds it awakens in her, without her realizing it, a thought the consequence of which is a muscular movement capable of imparting to the rod the direction corresponding to the sense of the answer which appears most likely to that person.



Chapter V: Application of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum to the Movement of Turning Tables

249. Let us recall the facts set out in the first paragraph of the third part devoted to turning tables (178 and 179).

First and second facts. — A person places his hand upon a pedestal table, a small round table, etc.; it will happen that the piece of furniture remains at rest or that it turns upon itself.

Third and fourth facts. — Several persons place their hands upon a pedestal table or a round table, in such a way as to establish a continuous chain because they touch one another by the fingers, or else they place them there without touching; the piece of furniture will remain at rest or will take on a movement of rotation.

I recall further that the movement is produced when the pressure ceasing to be perpendicular to the surface of the table, a part of the action operates in the lateral direction, that the resultant is not equal to zero, and that it suffices to overcome the inertia of the table.

250. The persons who applied my explanation of the movement of the exploring pendulum to that of tables understood matters in the manner I am about to state; I shall distinguish as before the circumstance in which there is REST from that in which there is MOVEMENT (178 and 179).

251. First circumstance: REST.

It is understood that there may be rest in the following three cases:

First case. — The hands are applied perpendicularly upon the table; hence its stability in the position in which it is finds itself increased by this pressure.

Second case. — The hands applied upon the table cease to press it perpendicularly; there is therefore lateral action. As there are several hands, if the lateral action from left to right neutralizes the lateral pressure from right to left, or, in other terms, if the resultant of the forces is equal to zero, there can be no movement.

Third case. — The resultant of the lateral forces, not being equal to zero, is insufficient to overcome the inertia of the table.

252. Second circumstance: MOVEMENT.

There is movement of the table whenever:

1°. The hands do not press the table perpendicularly;

2°. The resultant of the forces acting laterally is not equal to zero;

3°. This resultant is energetic enough to overcome the inertia of the table.

253. Many people who have never sought to give themselves an account of the manner in which a body at rest receives movement are extremely surprised by certain phenomena produced by a motive cause, whose action, very feeble in a second, continues during a certain time.

For example, the pressure of a finger upon a block of stone of a few cubic decimetres becomes sensible by means of an index, as Fraunhofer has demonstrated by means of a very ingenious apparatus, of which M. Œrsted had seen the effects with admiration.

An ordinary pendulum, whose points of suspension are taken in a wall, communicates its movement of oscillation to a pendulum placed similarly on the other side of the wall.

Friction exercised at the extremity of an iron bar longitudinally sets the other extremity into sonorous vibrations.

These facts demonstrate how excessively feeble efforts, but continuous and multiplied in the same direction, can set in motion a body whose mass appears out of proportion with the motive cause.

Finally, it is well to recall the following case:

A regiment marching at the military step on a suspension bridge communicates to the materials of this bridge vibrations which, sufficiently repeated, effect its rupture, because the resultant of these vibrations carries the molecules outside their sphere of cohesion. Now, this rupture would not have taken place if the step of the regiment had been irregular, because then if the resultant had not been equal to zero, it would have been altogether incapable of surmounting the resistance of the materials of the bridge.

254. Let us see the relation of these facts to the influence I attribute to the idea of a phenomenon of the external world depending on ourselves and occupying our thought, when this latter, without being a will, nevertheless gives rise to the muscular movement necessary for the production of the phenomenon (207).

255. If one now supposes that persons have their hands upon a table, according to my manner of seeing, they represent to themselves the table turning from right to left or from left to right, since they have placed themselves there to be witnesses of this movement; hence, unknown to themselves, they act to impart to the table the movement which they represent to themselves. If they do not act in the same direction, it may happen that there is no movement; this is what I have observed. Five persons forming the chain on a small pedestal table, one of them desired vividly that it should turn, and, in spite of that, it remained immobile for an hour. After half an hour, the chain was re-formed, and three-quarters of an hour passed without its setting itself in motion. If the four persons who cooperated in the experiment had not a desire equal to that of the first to see the pedestal table turn, assuredly none was animated by a contrary desire.

256. When persons desire that the table turn, the movement must be more frequent than rest, for the reason that it suffices for one of them to remark a certain movement in another for herself to follow this movement by an imitation of which she does not give herself an account, but which is none the less real, according to the tendency to movement determined in us by the sight of a body which moves (288).

257. In the comparison I make of turning tables with the divining rod and the pendulum, one must never lose sight of the very great difference which may exist, on the one hand, between the tables at whose phenomena several persons concur, and, on the other hand, the rod and the pendulum in whose movement only a single person intervenes.

Indeed, the cause of the assurance with which I have set out my explanation of the movement of the exploring pendulum rests upon this principal circumstance, that, having been alone in experimenting upon this phenomenon, no certainty can exceed that which I have acquired in submitting conclusions drawn from my own observation to the control experiments which I have reported, and, moreover, that no one as well as I can appreciate the desire which animated me to know the truth, apart from all interest and all hypothesis.

Now, this consciousness of having made experiments alone without any foreign influence, of having sought truth for itself, in not shrinking before any trial proper to dissipate doubts, you no longer have it, at least in the same degree, with cooperators, even when you grant them intelligence and good faith. What will it be if, knowing them little, you raise doubts as to their good faith, their gravity and their capacity?

258. This difficulty of appreciating the exactitude of experiments resulting from the concurrence of several persons is the reason why every serious mind will refuse to go into a drawing room to see there, it is said, experiments in which several persons will cooperate who are as unknown to him as the master of the house to which he is begged to go. Never, in such a gathering, will experiments become a subject of study, the proprieties taking away from you all liberty to repeat them, to modify them, and to submit them to a control sufficient to give you a conviction.

259. Finally, a motive would have much diminished the desire I might have had to multiply my observations on turning tables; it is the knowledge I have had of the experiments of M. Faraday: their conformity with those I had imagined, my great esteem for their author, the analogy of the interpretation he gave of them with my explanation of the exploring pendulum, made me think that new experiments on my part would have been altogether superfluous.

260. M. Faraday, after having established that in the movement of the table determined by persons of perfect good faith there was no electrical or magnetic effect, has perfectly demonstrated that the phenomenon is produced by a pressure of the hands, which is directed laterally or, as he says, horizontally. He made two principal experiments in order to make this lateral pressure evident.

The first consisted in superposing four or five pieces of cardboard with a polished surface, between each of which he placed little pellets of a mastic of wax and turpentine oil; the lowest cardboard rested upon a sheet of sandpaper applied upon the table. The cardboards diminished in extent from the upper to the lower, and a line traced with a brush indicated their original position. The mastic was such that it made the cardboards adhere together with a force nonetheless insufficient not to yield to a lateral action exercised for a certain time.

When this system of cardboards had been examined after the movement of the table, it was established that there had been a displacement greater in the upper cardboard than in the lower cardboard, so that the table had only moved after the cardboards, and the cardboards after the hands. When the table had not been set in movement, the displacement of the cardboards nevertheless indicated an action on the hands' part.

261. M. Faraday's second experiment had for its object to show the eyes, by an index, whether it was the hand or the table that moved first, or whether they began to move at the same time. Represent to yourself a vertical rod fixed to the table, visible to the eye, touching a paper index some inches long, itself fixed at the edge of a polished cardboard sheet laid on the table, to which it adheres by little pellets of mastic. A mark indicates on the table the position of the cardboard sheet and of the index. It is on this sheet that the hands are applied. The index may be visible or hidden from the operator's eye at the observer's will. In the case where the index was hidden, the table turned, and the index always indicated then that there had been lateral pressure. One could establish further that the index indicated this pressure before the table turned. In the case where the index was visible, all movement ceased, even though the polished cardboard, deprived of mastic, no longer adhered to the table and could glide at the least effort.

262. What is the explanation of this last fact? Here it is, by M. Faraday: if the table no longer turned when the operator saw the index, it is because the index's displacement counterbalanced the operator's tendency, who thus perceived that, without having consciousness of it, he had exercised a lateral effort.

263. Can one conceive a more satisfactory confirmation of the explanation of the explorer pendulum's movement given twenty years before the preceding one? I do not think so. Indeed, when I had my eyes open and my thought represented to itself the movement of a pendulum in a determined sense and in the place I saw, the pendulum moved in that sense and in that place, by an act of my muscles of which I had had no consciousness. The movement ceased when my thought was that it could cease. Finally, when my eyes were closed and my thought ceased to see the pendulum and the place where it could move, it stayed at rest. In the last experiment described by M. Faraday, the operator believes the table turns without his producing an effort; he is therefore in the condition in which I found myself when the pendulum oscillated between my hands. Now does the operator perceive an index fit to make sensible to him the least movement he makes for the table to turn? That sight paralyses an action of which he had no previous consciousness, and the table no longer turns. M. Faraday's explanation of turning tables is therefore identical to the one I gave of the explorer pendulum.



Chapter VI: Application of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum to the Movement of Striking or Speaking Tables

264. I remarked, in speaking of striking tables (Part III), that a great number of the questions to which they answer, it is said, are absolutely similar to those Fathers Ménestrier and Lebrun cite in works dated 1694 and 1702 as having been addressed to the divining rod; and I remarked further that the analogy of the questions is found again in the answers. Now, because I do not doubt that the cause of the explorer pendulum's movement intervenes in the movement of the rod interrogated with the intention of knowing things of the domain of the moral world concerning a more or less remote past, the present, and the future, I believe that among the facts of which I have spoken there are some relating to men of good faith, conformably to what I said of my experiments on the explorer pendulum. For the same reason, analogous facts flowing from the same cause can, in my view, manifest themselves when one interrogates no longer a rod but a table; a table not isolated, but which one touches with an emotion one must have experienced oneself to know it, and to know the illusions to which the mind gives itself over when, freed from observation of the visible world, it passes to the exclusive contemplation of the invisible world.

265. When a table answers the questions addressed to it, it is therefore through the intermediary of a person. Now, let that person be of good faith, and the answers will have, in general, the most intimate relations with that person's mind, feelings, knowledge; in a word, there will be a perfect harmony between the answers and the personality. Now this remark is absolutely applicable to the cases I have cited of a rod's answers to the questions addressed to it.

266. I sum myself up by saying that my principle can find its application as well for striking tables as for the rod employed as a means of divination; and I say, in consequence, that the faculty of making a table strike with one foot or another — once acquired, as well as faith in the intelligence of that table — I conceive how a question addressed to the table awakens in the person acting on it, without his rendering himself account of it, a thought whose consequence is the muscular movement capable of making one of the table's feet strike conformably to the sense of the answer appearing most plausible to that person. (Having heard it said that it was impossible for a table with several feet to lift indifferently one of them while a person's hands remain applied at the same place or thereabouts, I declare that a young lady, very adroit at making tables turn and endowed with enough good sense to believe she makes them turn without recourse to any other spirit than her own, made me witness of this fact, which I had been told was impossible.)

267. That is what appears plausible to me in the phenomenon of striking tables; but, having regard to the reserves made previously (§§24, 31, 176, 185), I say, whatever this plausibility in my eyes, that I do not present it as the truth, and with the assurance I have put into expounding the theory of the phenomena of the explorer pendulum, deduced from my experiments and my personal observations. That one has recourse to spirits to make tables turn, count the candles or lamps of a salon and pieces of money; to ask them the hours, the day of the month, the ages of persons, the conduct to hold or the part to take in a given circumstance, the regime most favourable to a patient; that one consults them on the sciences, the arts, politics, the economy of societies, and theology — those are things outside our domain which I must abstain from discussing. But, as a friend of truth and humanity, I adjure the men of good faith who believe themselves to have the power of acting on spirits to use their influence otherwise than they have done until now. Instead of idle questions on things one knows, which testify to the little esteem the interrogator has for the intelligence of the spirit he addresses; instead of questions dictated by the most naïve egoism in the individual's interest, propose questions truly worthy of those intelligences which, delivered from the infirmities of a material body, obey your voice; ask them the means of escaping cholera and yellow fever, and when you have obtained true answers to these high questions, you may then rightly exalt the sublimity of your science and show the vanity of natural philosophy.



Final Considerations of Part Four

268. The principle of the explorer pendulum, such as I have just formulated it, considered in its relations with the experimental sciences from the most restricted standpoint — that is, in its immediate relation with a special subject to which it applies — has an incontestable importance, because it shows the errors into which minds that have studied the sciences of the domain of natural philosophy can be drawn, all the while believing they remain within the limits of experience. To the writings of Thouvenel and of Tristan on the rod, and of Gerboin on the explorer pendulum, which are three examples to cite in support of this proposition, there is a fourth, little known, but too interesting and too intimately bound to my subject for me to pass it over in silence.

269. Long after the publication of my Letter to M. Ampère, I found again in the Philosophical Transactions and in Dr. Priestley's History of Electricity facts adding some interest to my explanation of the explorer pendulum. All physicists know the importance of Gray's discoveries in electricity; but many of our contemporaries are ignorant that the last works occupying him concern the explorer pendulum, and that on his deathbed he expounded them to the secretary of the Royal Society of London, Dr. Mortimer. An iron globe of one inch to one and a half inches in diameter, feebly electrified, is placed at the centre of a circular cake of resin seven to eight inches in diameter. A light body, suspended from a very fine thread five to six inches long, whose free end one holds in the hand above the iron globe, moves in a circle spontaneously and constantly, according to Gray, from west to east. If the iron globe is at some distance from the centre of the circular cake, the light body's movement is an ellipse whose eccentricity is the distance of the globe from the cake's centre. If the cake is elliptical and the iron globe at the centre, the light body will describe an ellipse of the same eccentricity as the cake's ellipse…

269 (continued). If the iron globe is in one of the foci of the cake's ellipse, the light body will have a more rapid movement in the apogee than in the perigee of its orbit. The light body would make the same revolutions around the iron globe placed on a table without resting on an electric body. But the movement only takes place insofar as the pendulum is held in the hand.

270. Gray did not doubt that, if God lent him life, he would carry his electrical experiments to perfection, that he would astonish the world with a new sort of planetarium by which he would establish a certain theory fit to explain the movements of the celestial bodies.

271. Dr. Mortimer confirmed Gray's experiments, and said the pendulum made revolutions around bodies of different figures and diverse species, as well as around an iron globe.

272. The experiments were repeated, with a great variety of circumstances, by M. Wheeler and other persons, in the house where the Royal Society of London assembled: but no consequence could be drawn from them. Finally, M. Wheeler, after many experiments and diverse results, said that his opinion was that the desire to produce the movement from west to east was the secret cause which had determined the suspended body to move in this direction by means of some impression which came from the hand, although he had not himself perceived that he gave any movement to his hand.

273. Priestley, in reporting the experiments of Gray, adopts the opinion of Wheeler and adds that the chimeras of this great electrician (Gray) teach those who follow him in the same career that one must be very circumspect in the consequences one draws.

If Wheeler did not submit his opinion to new experiments to give it the character of truth, in conformity with the experimental method, and if hence it can only be considered as an induction, my researches place it beyond doubt and give it an importance it would not have had without them, for today, when doubt is no longer permitted on the explanation of the movement of the exploring pendulum, evidently the experiments of Gray, of Mortimer and of Wheeler are facts to cite in its favour.

274. The principle of the exploring pendulum will explain, in certain cases, the difference existing between results obtained at the same time by different experimenters who have worked on the same subject with different views. When one has oneself sought the truth during a certain period of time, one arrives at the conviction of the difficulties of knowing it in anything whatsoever, and hence the numerous errors with which the history of the sciences is sown no longer have cause to surprise. If all were to be attributed to levity, to a lack of skill, and, it is said, even to a lack of scientific probity, I should say nothing, but it is important to point out some of them; they are committed by men of entire good faith, and who to the spirit of research still ally the skill of the experimenter, so that their organs obey a serious and scientific thought. It is to them that I address myself, in order to call their attention to the principle of the exploring pendulum, so that, knowing it, they avoid errors which, unknown to them, come, in the end, under those reported to what is called the coup de pouce in the vulgar language of experimenters.

275. The principle of the exploring pendulum thus shows the experimenter the necessity of studying the influence of his thought upon his own organs, when they serve as intermediary between the external world and the understanding in the study of phenomena within the province of natural philosophy.

It shows the philosopher how much it matters, in the interest of truth, "to know all the influence that thought can have upon the organs of the body, without this thought being the will; and how much, when it is a question, from the point of view of morality, of appreciating certain actions, it is necessary to distinguish those of which I have just spoken from actions emanating from a pronounced will."



Part Five: Intervention of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum in a Great Number of Acts of Human Life



Introduction

276. I shall distinguish in the life of man and of animals acts belonging to four distinct categories, before speaking of the intervention of the principle of the exploring pendulum in a great number of acts of human life. These four categories of acts are:

1°. Acts relating to instinct; 2°. Acts relating to reason; 3°. Acts relating to imitation; 4°. Acts relating to habit.

I. — Acts relating to instinct.

277. When one studies the acts of animals dependent on instinct, not in books, but in nature itself, one soon acquires the conviction that the explanations that have been proposed of them by making them depend on a transmission of knowledge from ancestors to their young, or on imitation of what the latter see the former do, are devoid of all plausibility. There is really neither teaching of the young, nor imitation on their part. The chick, from its exit from the egg, knows how to avoid the obstacles it encounters, and knows the grain proper to nourish it, for from as far away as it perceives it for the first time, it rushes upon it to peck at it. The little duck, to which water is unknown, rushes into that which it has just perceived, and knows how to direct itself there with its feet without hesitation, without uncertainty, and with the same ease as it will do at the end of its life.

II. — Acts relating to reason.

278. The acts that we refer to reason, products of reflection and of an examination prior to their execution, could have differed from what they are, because of their emanation from a free being endowed with a will.

III. — Acts relating to imitation.

279. There are acts to which one may give oneself, because one is witness that another than oneself executes them, and that, without this circumstance, one would never have thought of doing. They differ therefore from acts relating to instinct, and are entirely foreign to those of reason, when one executes them without willing it or without being aware of it.

IV. — Acts relating to habit.

280. The acts to which man and animals frequently give themselves can become so familiar, that they execute them with such a spontaneity that one is tempted to refer them to a sort of instinct; but, as result of an exercise more or less frequently repeated, they differ absolutely from acts of instinct, such as I have just envisaged it.

The acts that one refers to habit in animals arise almost all from the influence that man has exercised on them.

281. The acts that in man one refers to habit can have several first causes.

They can depend:

1°. On habits that one has taken from a master;

2°. On habits that one has given oneself voluntarily;

3°. On habits that one has contracted without willing it and without being aware of it;

4°. On habits born of imitation.

282. The movements of a musician playing an instrument, like piano, harp, violin, etc., can only be the result of a long exercise, whatever moreover the agility of his organs. It is this long habit that allows him to go as fast as thought.

283. The dramatic artist is in the same case as the musician: his words, the play of his physiognomy and his gestures must go together, so that all the effect of which he is capable is produced.

284. A consequence of what I have just said of the necessity of habit in order that the movements of certain organs, the hand in particular, follow the rapidity of the thought that orders them when these movements are numerous and varied, and in continuous succession, is that there exists a sufficiently rapid correspondence between them and this thought, correspondence that I shall sometimes designate by the expression of harmony.

Now, this correspondence, fruit of habit once acquired, needs to be maintained by frequent exercise, and, despite that, there comes an age where this harmony weakens, if indeed it does not disappear absolutely.

For example, as long as harmony exists between thought and the movement of the hand that retraces it by writing, the pen follows the march of ideas without gap; but in the contrary case where the accord is broken or rather weakened by age, your thought says Alexandre est, and your hand writes Aiexest, either because the movement of the hand cannot follow the thought, or because memory weakening when you have thought Alexandre, the duration of the perception is such, that -andre is effaced when you think est; so that if there is no solution of continuity in the thought, it exists in the writing that should have retraced it.

285. If the foal coming out of its mother's belly, just as the little chick coming out of the egg, support themselves on their feet and walk at once without having learned it, the child who walks alone at a certain age found himself in a different case, for, evidently, he learned to walk; if therefore instinct had part in walking, this part is decidedly very weak, relatively to the part of the exercise to which he gave himself to assure his walking.

286. In the study made to learn to walk, one must include the movements attempted to remove oneself quickly enough from the direction one is following, when one perceives an obstacle only at the moment when it threatens you, the exercise to which one has given oneself to walk without danger on a roof, on the cornice of a mountain, on a narrow plank placed above water or an abyss, on a stretched rope, etc.

287. The acts in which intervenes the principle that I have exposed above, in speaking of the exploring pendulum, do not fall into any of the preceding categories:

1°. They are not instinctive;

2°. They are not the product of a reasoning;

3°. They are not the product of a habit;

4°. They are not the result of imitation.

But in concluding thus, I am far from failing to recognize the part of habit and of imitation in varied acts where intervenes, no doubt, the principle whose influence I am going to study.



Chapter I: Influence of the Sight of a Body in Movement on Our Own Body

288. The principle of which I have spoken explains, in my view, a tendency to movement that the sight of a body that moves provokes in us.

Examples. — When we follow with our eyes a bird that flies, a stone or an arrow that cleaves the air, our body moves in their direction without our having the will for it.

The sight of running water produces in us an analogous effect, and the fable that mythology tells of men who, attracted by nymphs, naiads, potamids or nereids, threw themselves into living waters where their sight had fixed itself, is not devoid of all truth.

A player of bowls or of billiards, following with the eye the moving body to which he has imparted the movement, carries his body in the direction that he desires to see this moving body follow, as if it were still possible for him to direct it toward the goal that he wanted to make it reach.



Chapter II: Of the Intervention of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum with the Stability of Our Own Body. Cause of Seasickness

289. When the harmony of thought with our muscular organs exists, everyone knows with what rapidity is executed a movement that we judge proper to prevent the effect of any cause whatever that threatens our person, such as a fall or a shock. If it is true, as I have said, that the faculty of walking requires prior attempts, a certain exercise on the part of the child (286), it goes without saying that all that relates to assuring walking, to preventing falls and shocks, is likewise the result of an exercise or of habit. The efforts made in this case are in relation with the thought of the intensity that we attribute to the cause whose effect we want to prevent, which does not mean that the relation is always a perfectly exact evaluation. However it is the occasion to recall how admirable is, in a great number of cases, the precise manner in which we evaluate the effort to produce, in order that a stone, a quoits disc, a bowl, reach a determined goal, in order that our body clear a ditch whose width has just been evaluated at a simple sight, and at a run still. Evidently, such acts are executed only after frequent exercises that create a habit; and the latter, once acquired, is preserved only on condition of keeping itself constantly in breath by repeated exercises.

290. One feels, from that, the influence that age must have on all the acts that attach to the harmony of thought with the muscular organs: weakened sight no longer perceives the objects that threaten us as it signaled them to us in young age; our organs little flexible, little agile in old age, no longer lend themselves as well as formerly to the execution of a movement, and we are no longer disposed, as we were then, to prevent falls, avoid shocks.

291. Compare the difficulty that the old man experiences in maintaining himself in equilibrium on the slippery plane where he walks, and the facility with which the young man prevents an imminent fall in the same circumstance, when, having lost equilibrium, he re-establishes it at once by throwing the upper part of his body to the opposite of the side toward which he leans.

292. The habit of preventing a fall by carrying the upper part of the body in the opposite direction to that toward which an accident has made us lean, is so intimately linked to our nature, that there manifests in us a tendency to movement, even when a movement on our part in the sense of this tendency is impossible. For example, in a carriage, the fear of overturning stiffens you in the direction opposite to that which threatens you, and the efforts then attempted are all the more painful, as fear and irritability are greater. In ordinary falls, letting oneself fall has less inconvenience than the effort attempted to prevent the fall. It is in this manner that we understand the proverb: There is a God for children and for drunkards.

293. In all the cases of which we have just spoken, the fear of a danger makes one execute a movement contrary to that which threatens us. Let us see now the circumstance where the principle that we are studying intervenes, at the same time as acts a tendency to movement in the contrary sense of a movement that we judge threatens us.

294. When, walking on the cornice of a mountain, whose width presents a way much wider than that which would be strictly necessary if one walked on a great road, one suddenly comes to discover the depth of an abyss that one has below oneself, at the same moment so to speak, one throws oneself irresistibly to the side opposite the abyss, pushed by the instinct of conservation which struggles against a tendency to movement in the contrary sense, determined by the sight of the abyss. This tendency is still remarkable when one finds oneself on a bridge without railing, placed above a precipice; this precipice, seen from one side of the bridge, makes you throw yourself to the opposite side, and puts you in the same state of anxiety as that from which you wanted to withdraw yourself. Thus, solicited successively in two opposite senses, you are struck with stupor and reduced to immobility, if indeed the too keen fear of falling on the side where you are does not make you run the danger of throwing yourself to the opposite side. Such is, in the case of which I speak, the position of a man who has not been habituated to walk in a narrow way suspended over an abyss, whereas the man who has this habit walks there as surely as on a great road, for the reason that, free of fright, he does not think of the danger that the first dreads. Finally, the position of the latter could become still more critical, if he came to discover the depth of the abyss at the same time as, following with the eye the flight of a bird, the throw or the fall of a stone, he had already obeyed to a certain point to this tendency that carries us toward a body in movement (288).

296. [The first cause of seasickness] — the cause, as I wrote in 1833, that in seasickness something analogous to the preceding facts may take place in us. At that epoch I had only an old memory of what I had experienced at sea in 1814, and I was very reserved. Today, after two voyages on the Channel in 1851, I shall be more explicit. The first cause of this malady is, in my view, in the continuity of the efforts we make not to fall, or, what comes to the same thing, to conserve our stability; thus it declares itself, in general, only some time after one has left the shore. But the precision of the subject requires that I envisage the persons experiencing it in the three positions in which they may find themselves: A standing, B seated, and C lying down.

A. Standing. 297. It is after having struggled some time not to fall, against the movements of the vessel carrying you, that a very painful fatigue makes itself felt behind the head, in the region of the cerebellum, whose influence on our movements is incontestable. This fatigue evidently arises from the circumstance of ceaselessly counteracted movements. One conceives it by recalling that in a vessel, independently of the progressive motion, there are movements from high to low and from low to high at once, following the line of direction and following the perpendicular to that line — or, what comes to the same, in the sense of the building's length and in the sense of its breadth. These are the movements called pitching and rolling, whose resultant is, in our view, the cause of seasickness. Consider the pitching. The bridge on which you stand rising, you are threatened with falling backward; hence you prevent the fall by bearing the body forward, but the effort is not accomplished before the necessity of throwing yourself backward makes itself felt. The will bearing you backward before the effort attempted to bear you forward is accomplished, there results a contrariety between the will and the organs charged with executing the movement.

298. Pitching, considered to the exclusion of rolling, may be assimilated to the movement of a swing, with all the more reason in that certain persons cannot give themselves to that exercise without experiencing seasickness. There is more: my honourable colleague M. Armand Seguier, who shares my opinions on the cause of this malady, cites in support an observation he kindly drew up at my request, and which I am happy to reproduce textually: "Individuals accustomed to the exercise of the swing, to the point of being able to give themselves to that amusement even coming from table and in various positions, have been disagreeably impressed as soon as the oscillation or balancing was no longer voluntary for them. Thus, having placed on a swing my son, very much accustomed to gymnastic exercises, and able with impunity to swing head-down for a long enough time without experiencing any symptom, it sufficed for me to hold him there and swing him some instants contrary to his will to make him feel a real malaise; for that, I invited a third person to call him, to provoke his desire to cease the swing exercise, and I perceived at once, by the change of colour in his face, that the contrariety he experienced at being swung, when he no longer gave his consent to that exercise, sufficed to occasion him a malaise of the kind felt at sea."

299. Effects of rolling. — If the effect of the swing's movement demonstrates that of pitching reduced to its greatest simplicity — that is, uncomplicated by the rolling's effect — it is easy to conceive how, the action of this last movement coming to add itself to the pitching's action, seasickness will then be carried to the highest degree of intensity, and how the struggle between the will and the muscular organs, solicited at once to execute movements from back to front, from front to back, from right to left and from left to right, will bring on the perturbation disposing the stomach to nausea, then to vomiting.

B. Seated. 300. Instead of standing, you are seated: the condition will be much better against seasickness, since your equilibrium will be assured; yet what I have seen of the swing's effects shows that this position cannot be an absolute preservative, for it does not preserve you from a contrariety of movements, since it does not absolutely withdraw you from the double effect of pitching and rolling. The truth is that such a person standing will experience seasickness in a circumstance who will not experience it seated in the same circumstance.

C. Lying down. 301. If lying down is a position favourable against seasickness, let us recognise well that it is not yet an absolute preservative against it, where very irritable persons are concerned; I shall never forget having seen a passenger from Dover to Calais show the first symptoms of seasickness before the packet's departure — and though he was still seated! No doubt the fear of the malady, always present to the thought in a delicate or irritable constitution, incapable for any cause whatever of experiencing a diversion to the influence of the dominating thought, cannot be combated by any efficacious means. The persons of whom I speak are in the case of those who, preoccupied with the fear of overturning in a carriage, can be continually counteracted in their movements. Finally, though lying down, the sight fixing itself on objects that render the vessel's movements sensible may occasion the malady one wishes to combat. There is therefore advantage in closing the eyes; I do not say in plunging into darkness, for then certain persons might imagine dangers that would not present themselves to their mind if they had the certainty of being able to see, on opening their eyes, if they had the will.

302. The explanation I give of seasickness accounts perfectly for the influence of certain circumstances on the persons susceptible of being affected by it. Thus, be placed on a vessel's deck at the moment of strongest pitching, and figure to yourself that you are in a swing to whose movement you abandon yourself voluntarily and with pleasure, and you will be able to prevent or diminish seasickness, supposing you are seated or in a fixed position excluding the fear of falling. If you are seated on deck and your sight bears to the horizon or to distant objects, the thought thus distracted from the vessel's movements, making a diversion to the effect they could produce without it, prevents the malady or weakens its intensity. It is said one conjures the malady by holding a glass of water in the hand, so as to maintain its equilibrium despite the pitching and rolling. Without claiming this means' absolute efficacy in all cases, I conceive nevertheless that there is such a person whose attention it will captivate strongly enough to withdraw him from the seasickness he would have experienced had he not had recourse to it.



Chapter III: Relation of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum with Imitation

303. The tendency to movement in a determined sense, the effect of the attention one gives to a certain object, is the first cause of several phenomena generally referred to imitation.

304. In the case where sight and even hearing bear our thought on a person who yawns, the muscular movement of yawning is ordinarily the consequence in us. I could say as much of the communication of laughter; and this very example presents, more than any other analogue, a circumstance that seems to me to support strongly the interpretation I give of these phenomena: it is that laughter, feeble at first, can, if prolonged — pass me the expression — accelerate itself (as we saw the hand-held pendulum's oscillations increase in amplitude under sight's influence); and laughter accelerating can go as far as convulsion.

305. I do not doubt that the spectacle of certain actions fit to act strongly on our frail machine, that the animated recital of voice and gesture of those same actions, or even the knowledge one takes of them by a simple reading, bear certain individuals to those same actions, in consequence of a tendency to movement which thus determines them mechanically to an act they would never have thought of without a circumstance foreign to their will, and to which they would never have been led by what must be named instinct in animals.

306. The great actor is he whose gesture and the movement of his physiognomy correspond to the movement the sentiments he translates on the stage must have excited in the character he represents.

307. The history painter who has studied nature seizes the position the originals of the personages he paints must have had when they concurred in the act the canvas is to reproduce.

308. The great poet is he whose verses awaken in those who listen the movements corresponding to the facts he sings: such is the recital of a passage of the Iliad that bears Alexander to throw himself on his arms.

309. Imitation, conceived as I have just said by the actor, the painter, the poet or, to speak in a more general manner, by the writer, is reproduced faithfully on the stage, on the canvas and in the narrative only after a thorough study of the model. If the latter can, strictly speaking, furnish all the features of the copy, the copy will gain from the intimate relations that the artist may have with the personality of the model, whether that intimacy is revealed in the work by added features, or because those of the model will have been better felt and more pronounced for the effect that the artist has set himself to produce.

310. In the end:

1°. The explanation that I have just given, with the developments that are its consequences, seems to me to present knowledge of physiognomy in action or, in other terms, of mimicry, in a light at once clearer and more scientific than it was before, precisely because of the study of the principle which demonstrates so clearly the intimacy of the movement of the parts of ourselves with the thought attached to it. Every person who henceforth wishes to study it from this point of view will envisage it in a manner both clearer and more positive than he would have done from the point of view from which it has generally been studied.

2°. An action interpreted by skilled actors, or even represented by painting and again expressed by the written word, can have, independently of a moral sense whose perfect appreciation belongs only to cultivated minds, a less elevated language, more accessible to the masses, which may have drawbacks more or less grave for the individual as well as for society.

3°. In descending from the most elevated moral effect that a work of art can produce on cultivated minds to the ordinary effects that the masses experience, one comes to explain to oneself the influence that this work can exert in provoking tendencies to movement in harmony with it; these tendencies, falling to a certain point within mechanical effects, can have very grave consequences.

311. I develop elsewhere (the Beaux-Arts book of my unpublished work on abstraction considered as an element of human knowledge in the search for absolute truth) the intervention of the principle of the exploring pendulum in the effects of music.



Chapter IV: Of the Influence of Faith and of Certain Predispositions on Certain Acts of Human Life

312. If the disposition to admit the truths of the Christian religion, which is called faith, is considered with reason by theologians as one of the conditions most favorable to ensuring the felicity of the future life, let us recognize in fact that those who, for whatever motive, maintain the truth of a system of propositions foreign to religion, and consequently within the province of free examination, insist in the most explicit manner on the happy influence that faith in this system exercises on the persons who adopt it in order to make applications of it in conformity with its ends. The magnetizers, for example, make faith in animal magnetism one of the conditions most favorable to giving birth to the marvelous phenomena that they attribute to this fluid, spread, according to them, in profusion in living bodies. I have said it, I do not believe in the existence of this fluid, but I am far from denying that certain individuals, placed in certain conditions, do not present particular phenomena, whose immediate cause has not yet been rigorously determined and whose serious study remains yet to be made.

However that may be, I recognize that the faith one has in oneself of being capable of a certain action is favorable to the realization of this action, even when one is mistaken about the true cause on which it depends. For example, in my experiments on the exploring pendulum (Part II, pages 154 and following), so long as I believed that the movements of oscillation were determined or stopped by bodies of the external world placed beneath it, in conformity with what M. Deleuze had told me, or, in other terms, so long as I had faith in this manner of seeing, the experiments succeeded. But as soon as the true cause of the phenomenon was known to me, and it was demonstrated to me that the movements of the pendulum were absolutely independent of the bodies of the external world, I ceased to produce them.

313. Faith, such as the magnetizers envisage it and such as I have just envisaged it, is therefore only a certain psychic state which predisposes us to do or to feel in a certain manner.

314. An analogous state to that which I have just pointed out is determined in us by very varied causes. I hesitate so much the less to speak of it that the developments into which I shall enter will give at once more generality to my views and more precision to particular facts which, for having analogy, are not identical.

315. In bringing in the principle of the exploring pendulum in several acts that are generally referred to imitation, I think I have given one more motive to make their realization conceivable; for, from the moment it is proved that thought relative to an act that manifests itself to the external world by a muscular movement is capable, without the intervention of the will, of giving birth to this movement, one conceives that the perception by sight or by hearing of a phenomenon that we are capable of reproducing will have on us a much stronger influence, as a cause of imitation, than that accorded to it when one does not bring in the principle of which I speak.

316. But this great influence of the principle being admitted, as well as a certain state, a predisposition, such as faith, acting in the same sense as the principle, the rigorous consequence deduced from it is that such an effect, which manifests itself through the concurrence of the principle and of the predisposition, will not manifest itself when the predisposition does not exist, a consequence which must not be forgotten lest one expose oneself to error.

