317. It is therefore because we are not always in the same psychic state that we do not constantly receive the same impression from the same thing. Thus, the yawning of another does not always make us yawn, laughter is not always communicated from the laugher to his neighbor, etc.

318. The simple practice of a profession, as well as the culture of an art or of a science, in a thousand varied circumstances, have recourse to various means whose definitive aim is to take possession of man's attention, in order to produce on him a determinate effect. These means tend in the end to predispose him in a determinate sense.

319. Merchant. — We have often heard merchants of objects of taste say that one of the difficulties of retail sale lies in the indecision of the buyer, and that the skill of the person entrusted with the sale is to know how to triumph over it. Generally she succeeds by calling attention to certain qualities to the exclusion of others, and a buyer can be carried away to the point of taking an object which will appear detestable to him after a few hours of possession.

320. Conjurer. — The art of the conjurer is founded on the rapidity of the movements, which does not allow the spectator to perceive the substitution of one object for another, and on the adroitness with which one diverts his attention from a thing essential to the trick that is to be performed, to fix it on any other that is absolutely foreign to it.

321. Orator. — The great orator, whose aim is to make the crowd share the passion that animates him, does not arrive all at once at his conclusion; he prepares it by predisposing it to accept it, and it is only after having succeeded in this that his last arguments come to assure his triumph.

322. The poet imitates the orator.

323. The man of letters, more disposed to please, to interest, than to instruct, has recourse precisely to the same means; preparation to predispose the reader to receive from the end all the effect that he has proposed to produce.

324. In the end, in the intellectual work of the orator, of the poet and of the man of letters, the accessories must be chosen and graduated in such a manner that, once the work is completed, they appear as essential parts of it, so happy will have been their arrangement for interesting, touching and moving deeply, and so well will they have predisposed toward making the final object of the work felt.

325. If we examine the scientific work, oral or written, made not to touch and to move by speaking to the heart, but to instruct, we shall again arrive at the same conclusion as regards the necessity of a prior predisposition of the persons to whom one addresses oneself. But then sensibility is no longer in play, it is to reason alone that one speaks. The best course to follow consists in first expounding the truths most accessible to the minds that must be instructed, and in rising gradually to those which are the least so. It is thus that one predisposes minds to receive the truths most difficult to learn.

But scientific knowledge being indefinite by its nature, the predisposition is not finite in the development made of it, as it is in that of a literary work where there is an absolute term; in the scientific work, the predisposition is continuous, the final effect receding incessantly as one advances in the field of the unknown.



Chapter V: Influence of the Principle of the Explorer Pendulum on Certain Acts in the Life of Animals. Final Reflections

326. I have pointed out that the intervention of the principle in the manifestation of the acts of human life which are attributed to imitation makes the fact easier to conceive than it would be without it. I believe it is the same for the acts that animals living in society execute when they repeat the movements that they have seen the chief of the troop make, or when they receive some impression, by a sense other than sight, that corresponds to this movement.

327. I do not doubt that in the phenomenon of fascination that an animal experiences at the sight of another, there does not occur something analogous to what we experience when we are solicited toward movements in opposite senses which neutralize one another.

END OF THE FIFTH PART.



Final Reflections

328. I said in the Introduction (21) that it is difficult to conceive that capital facts reputed true during centuries, and which really are, should fall into prolonged oblivion or that the memory of them should be preserved only by a small number of persons. This proposition served me as an argument against the opinion according to which one attributes to the divining rod a supernatural faculty, that of discovering moral things, and of leading back to knowledge of the past and even of penetrating into that of the future.

329. In view of the possession of a means so powerful for knowing what one has an interest in knowing, in view of the great number of persons who made use of the rod, and finally in view of the discussions of which the use made of it was the object from 1689 to 1702, would it not be inconceivable, if there had not been illusion on the part of those who believed in its power, that human knowledge should owe none of its progress to it? that not one of those questions which divide philosophers had been resolved? that not one of those diseases which afflict humanity had been conjured, neutralized or forever destroyed? Far from that; persons of the most recommendable kind, in the eighteenth century and in ours, such as Thouvenel and M. le comte de Tristan, while believing in the rod, have said and repeated that there exists nothing supernatural in its movement, because it acts by virtue of a fluid identical or analogous either to electricity or to magnetism. The last attempts of its partisans have therefore been to make it re-enter the category of natural facts, by stripping it of every faculty which would seem to participate in intelligence.

330. If one will be good enough to recall that more than a century and a half has elapsed since the time when one addressed to the rod the same questions that one addresses today to rapping tables (116, 245, 246, 247), serious minds will see that the sciences and society have little to hope from these latter.

331. Let us now examine the question of knowing whether it is useful to maintain in society the disposition to believe in divination by the rod, the exploring pendulum or the tables, things outside all religious tradition as well as of natural philosophy.

332. We have seen grave and reflective minds, such as Fathers Lebrun and Malebranche, the abbés de Rancé and Pirot, and Father Ménestrier, unanimous in blaming the use of the rod, considering it illicit, because, in the impossibility of attaching it to any religious tradition, they judged it foreign to God and to the angels, and, from that point, they were led to attribute it to the demon. If, before knowing the writings in which this manner of seeing is expounded, my experimental researches made me adopt another, that which I have developed in this work, I share completely the opinion of the respectable authorities that I recall on the use of the rod, of the pendulum and of the tables employed as a means of divination; one can derive no advantage from it, and the consequences can be more or less unfortunate for the persons who give themselves up to it in good faith and otherwise than to pass the time.

333. If the disposition to believe in marvelous or supernatural things had as its final term to favor the return of the indifferent or of the unbelieving to the religion of their fathers, I would conceive on the part of religious minds the thought of encouraging it. But I do not believe that the disposition of which I speak is to have this result as its definitive term, at least as regards the greatest number of those who will let themselves go to it, because the disposition to believe among young people deprived of religious ideas carries them at present much more toward ideas that they judge new than it disposes them to return to the religious traditions of the past.

334. Now it is these pretendedly new ideas, which no tradition recommends and which a blind faith adopts without prior examination, that I believe dangerous, and it is to combat their consequences that I invoke reason, that faculty by which man cannot be confounded with the brute, since definitively it is in it that resides the cause of perfectibility, the character by which he distinguishes himself from every living being.

335. I believe in civilization and consequently in a perfectibility of humanity, not indefinite, but in relation to the limited faculties of man. My faith rests on the consciousness I have of seeing this civilization assured by reason. For every change in the mutual relations of the individuals of a society, as well as in those of already civilized peoples, will answer to the generous hopes of the enlightened minds who willed it only on condition of not being abrupt, because it will be the result of reflective and not passionate convictions. If you have faith in human perfectibility, never therefore expose the men subjected to your influence to act in such a manner that after the action they draw back sooner or later short of the point from which they had set out to carry themselves forward.

For in effect, everything that tends to withdraw man from the empire of reason does not last; duration belonging, whatever one says and whatever one does, only to what is true, and consequently just and in the proximate or remote interest of society. Avoid error therefore, if you wish to hasten the march of civilization while assuring its progress. Now, if I say believe in what is of the domain of religious tradition, I add reason before admitting as true or even as possible what is outside that tradition.

336. Hence the necessity of always addressing oneself to the reason of those who give themselves up to studies of any kind whatsoever, by habituating their spirit to the severe reasonings that the experimental method entails, such as I have defined it. Let the teacher therefore abstain from entertaining the pupil's imagination with gratuitous hypotheses; let positive things be the basis of his teaching, and, after having demonstrated them as principles, let him develop their principal consequences, and then a thousand occasions will present themselves for exciting the pupil's attention by moving him through the account of the numerous marvels for which the sciences are indebted to conscientious labors, and by giving him just ideas of what the bringing to light of these marvels has cost in successive efforts to superior minds; let him abstain from every distinction taken from outside the nature of things: for if it has in his mouth the merit of clarity, it becomes later a cause of difficulties when it is a matter of applying it to determinate cases; let him carefully avoid breaking the chain of ideas in their development; let him not constantly oppose a science, a new school, to a science, an old school; let him show, on the contrary, the intimacy of the relations of the present with the past, by developing the progression of the human mind as a fact whose origin is that of civilization itself. A teaching emanating from this source will always have truth for its goal, and never will a young audience be exploited in the private interest of an ambitious man or in that of a party. The pupil, not being prepared to despise the past, or at least to count it for little, will appreciate what he owes to it; and, from that point, he will not be able to be the dupe of everything that comes to him as new; being ungrateful neither toward the present nor toward the past, he will not keep himself constantly on the alert before the future, expecting from it alone what he believes true, beautiful and great; in a word, he will never take appearance for reality, the false for the true, the alloy for pure gold.

