105. Some persons, wishing what had happened to Mlle Ollivet to happen to some of those who practically used the rod with success, cast their eyes on a Mlle Martin, a simple and very wise girl, says the author of the Lettres; her father was a Grenoble merchant. She had discovered metals in cellars; she had recognised the place where a bell lay hidden under water since the flood of the river that had carried away the suburban bridge. She told Father Lebrun that she found the place of springs, and that God had granted her a particular grace in that the rod turned for her over relics. "And who told you," replied Father Lebrun, "that relics could make the rod turn? — No one," she answered; "I only knew it turned over the bones of the dead and over many other things, and I saw clearly that relics must have more virtue than all that. I tried it and I succeeded." Father Lebrun adds that she succeeded in discovering several pieces of metal hidden in an alley of the seminary garden. Although this girl was simple, in Father Lebrun's phrase, the reverend had nevertheless perceived that Mlle Martin secretly put something in her hand to divine of what species the hidden metal was. I reproduce the following text literally, because later I shall make use of it. Father Lebrun said to her: "You wish then to make a mystery of your secret? But I could well divine it, and perhaps I know more about it than you think; I know persons who always carry little pieces of each species of metal; they also carry pieces of all the other things over which their rod turns, and here is the whole secret: if they make a metal different from the one hidden touch the rod, the rod no longer turns. If they make the same touch it, it turns still better. M. Peisson, prosecutor at the parliament, and some others do quite the contrary. If, for example, they make gold touch the rod and it no longer turns over the place where it turned before, that is for them an infallible sign that there is gold in that place. Such is their practice, and they have given reasons for it in a writing that has been circulating for some days." I interrupt the citation to remark that it is impossible to refer the rod's movement to any physical cause; for if one really can discover by this means the species of metal buried in the earth, it is assuredly not by employing procedures of which one is absolutely the contrary of the other. "Finally there are others," continues Father Lebrun, "who have no need to make anything touch the rod; it turns according to their intention… — O my father, who would have believed you knew so much!" cried the girl. "I must then tell you everything. I did not learn M. Peisson's secret; I do as the first ones. But I should indeed like intention to make the rod turn; that would be very short work: I must try it. Two gold louis are thrown on the ground in two different places: the rod turns several times over one and not over the other, according as she desired it."

106. Mlle Martin made the rod turn over the bones of a reliquary, and, to her great astonishment, it turned only by a sixth over a second reliquary presented to her, in which there were only some pieces of stuff that had served a Carmelite of Beaune, dead in the odour of great piety. From what she had just learned on the influence of intention, she made new trials on the reliquaries and on some pieces of metal; the rod turned or stayed motionless according as she desired it. Finally, M. the Abbé de Lescot and the father superior of the Oratory, Cavard, having preached to her, she renounced with a good heart the demon and the rod. She nevertheless held it once more over metals, and saw without emotion that it no longer turned for her. Mlle Martin's sister and her mother, afflicted that she could no longer use the rod, gave her back the desire to make use of it, and with the desire returned, it is said, the lost power.

107. Father Lebrun cites also Prior Barde, M. du Pernan, canon of Saint-Chef, and above all M. Expié, who, after praying God to make the rod's movement cease in their hands if that movement was not natural, saw it cease…

117. After recognising, with Father Ménestrier, that the ensemble of phenomena attributed to the divining rod cannot be referred to a physical cause, I shall reproduce an account he gives of experiments performed before him by a religious person, because this account, set against Father Lebrun's concerning Mlle Martin, will become a means of control, a true criterion of the proposition I have just recalled (§104): "I have seen," says Father Ménestrier, "a religious person who has this talent, and who then used it, believing it quite innocent and natural, seek water; and after she had found it, if one put in one of her hands a cloth or something else wet, the rod no longer turned. If she sought hidden gold, in vain one put water or silver in her hand, the rod did not cease turning for gold; but as soon as one put a piece of gold in her hand, its action ceased; which did not happen when she sought hidden silver, though she had gold in her hands." Thus, putting water in the hand that holds the rod set in motion by the presence of water is to destroy the latter's effect on the rod; in a word, there is neutralisation of an effect by the identical of the cause producing it. Here is an experimental fact attested by a trustworthy witness, Father Ménestrier. It is an example of M. Peisson's procedure.

118. Let us now recall that Mlle Martin discovered the nature of things by proceeding in an absolutely contrary manner, since the identical of the cause producing the rod's movement, put in contact with it, increased the movement, while what is different arrested it.

119. It evidently results from these facts, whose manifestation is equally proved, that they cannot be attributed to a physical cause, for in the same circumstances the same physical cause cannot produce two opposite effects. In the fourth part we shall see with what facility I shall explain them by one same cause; but that cause no longer belongs to the physical world, but to the moral world.

120. § XXI. Posthumous Itinerary Letters of Tollius, with notes by M. Hennin; 1700. Tollius and his friend Hennin are against the use of the rod. Hennin successively combats the explanation of the rod's movement given by the peripatetics and by the Cartesians. He goes so far as to say that to admit the possibility of tracking murderers by the effect on the rod of corpuscles exhaled from their bodies is to wish to reason in delirium; he positively denies the rod's virtue. I shall not set out his reasons, because they fall within those already set out; I shall confine myself to saying he saw rod-people who did not permit their eyes to be bandaged, or who made mistakes in making the experiments blindfolded.

121. § XXII. Critical History of the Superstitious Practices That Have Seduced Peoples and Embarrassed the Learned, etc., by a priest of the Oratory (Father Pierre Lebrun); Paris, 1702. The expression "superstitious practices" is not employed by the author with the sense given it in ordinary language; in using it, Father Pierre Lebrun means that these practices give rise to effects whose free and intelligent cause wills to seduce man: illicit in his eyes, he therefore proscribes them, as Cardinal Le Camus had already done at two epochs, in 1690 (mandement of 24 February 1690) and 1700 (mandement of 24 February 1700). The use of these practices, very frequent in Dauphiné since 1640 for discovering springs, was successively extended to the search for very varied things; for example, men, boys, and girls, for five sous, established, it was believed, by means of the rod, whether boundary marks of inheritances had been displaced; and their determination, a remarkable thing, was accepted by the interested parties as a tribunal's decision would have been. By the same means people claimed to find lost roads, and J. Aymar, the first in France, in 1688, searched for thieves and later for murderers.

122. Father Lebrun, seeing how uncertain the rod's indications are, preoccupied moreover with the disorders it could cause in families and in the decisions of justice, convinced besides that it is only an instrument the demon uses to deceive men, strove by every means to abolish its use forever; it is from that standpoint that the Critical History of the Superstitions must be judged, whose principal object concerns the divining rod. Not having to examine this book in its details, nor to discuss whether the rod's movement should be attributed to a spirit foreign to man, I shall extract from it what I believe fit to support the thesis I shall develop in the fourth part.

123. To give an idea of the work, it suffices to indicate the object of the three parts composing it. The first is consecrated to the history of the facts, the origin, and the progress of the rod. The second is consecrated to the cause that can make the rod turn, and to the rules necessary to discern natural effects from those that are not. The third part treats of the sufficiently common disposition that leads men not to condemn what does not appear outwardly harmful, and which engages several scholars to authorise superstitious practices that should be forbidden to Christians.

124. Father Lebrun reports a great number of cases where the rod failed. I shall choose some, to add to those M. le Prince wished the public to know, to disgust it with the rod.

125. M. de Francine Grand-Maison, provost of the Île-de-France and intendant of waters, told Father Lebrun that by virtue of the two charges with which he was invested he was very often engaged to make use of the rod to recognise criminals and discover springs, and that though he had employed a very great number of people reputed skilled at handling the rod, notably reverend Capuchin fathers, he never found anyone in whom one could have confidence, because the rod often gave the change and very often spoke falsely. Near the town of Salon in Provence one sees wells of a frightful depth, says Father Lebrun, dug uselessly on the deceptive indications the rod had given. Marshal de Boufflers, having no water in the neighbourhood of a château he had just had built in Picardy, had recourse to M. Legentil, prior of Dorenic near Guise, whose reputation was great in the country. He stayed three weeks with the marshal; the rod turned strongly in several places, and the witnesses said the prior trembled with fright at it. Yet digging was done in those places to sixty feet without finding water. Father Lebrun recounts that in September 1695 M. de Francine, M. the Abbé de Château-neuf, and M. the king's lieutenant of Charleroi brought him a young boy become famous at Paris by the manner in which he used the rod. These gentlemen went to the Château-d'Eau near the Observatory, where M. de La Hire and a mathematical physicist were present. The rod did not turn over the place where all the Arcueil waters pass. He was led into a garden where metals had been buried; the rod did not turn there either.

126. One could cite a great number of passages where, in the facts recounted by the author, the influence of the thought — whether will, desire, or simple intention — of him who holds the rod is wholly evident; but, forced to restrict myself, I shall choose the following, which go perfectly to my purpose, as repetition and confirmation of those I have extracted from the works previously examined.

127. In speaking of the means of determining the nature of a body acting screened on the rod, from the increase of movement or its cessation manifested in consequence of the contact of a known body with it (see above, §105), I said that some conclude the identity of the body touching the rod with the hidden body from the increase of the rod's movement, while others draw the same conclusion from the absolutely contrary effect. Now it is evident, as I remarked, that the effects cannot be attributed to any blind cause, but to a free cause, and I shall say later, to man's thought. Those who conclude identity of nature from the increase of the rod's movement admit the corpuscle theory, and say that the corpuscles exhaled, for example, from the gold in the ground and those exhaled from the rod and from the gold touching it conspire to increase the movement, while if the rod touched something other than gold, the corpuscles of that thing would prevent the outflow of the others. Those who conclude identity of nature from the cessation of the rod's movement believe in the sympathy manifested by an attraction, and say that the gold touching the rod, attracting the rod, makes the effect of the subterranean gold cease. Certainly all reflection would be superfluous after these citations.

128. Let us add two new facts to the analogy I have established between the divining rod and striking tables, when answers are addressed to them to which they reply. M. Duverdier, doctor of the Sorbonne, received a letter from Toulouse, dated 26 May 1700, in which he was told of a curé who handled the rod in such a manner that it answered questions put to it…



Chapter V: Of the Use of the Rod from 1702 to Our Own Day

151. On seeing the approvals given to the books of Father Lebrun by very distinguished theologians, the retraction of some, who at first had found nothing reprehensible in the Physique occulte of the Abbé de Vallemont, on seeing finally the placing on the Index of this last work by the Inquisition of Rome (1), it would seem that the rod ought to have been proscribed forever by the Church. However, it was nothing of the sort, for in the eighteenth century a great number of ecclesiastics, such as priors, abbés, curés, had recourse to it to discover waters, and a bishop of Grenoble, breaking with the tradition of Cardinal Le Camus, went so far as to point out to a man who made a profession of the rod a pretended means of estimating the depth at which springs are found.

(1) Histoire critique des pratiques superstitieuses. After the judgment of the Academy of Sciences, one finds the citation of the decree of the Inquisition at the date of 26 October 1701.

152. The divining rod therefore did not cease to be in use during the eighteenth century, and, a rather remarkable thing, is that the men most renowned for discovering springs were from Dauphiné, like J. Aymar. They were called turners, or dowsers. One of them, in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, vividly occupied public attention, and was named Barthélemy Bleton. Born at Saint-Jean-en-Royans, he was raised by charity in a charterhouse of Dauphiné. At the age of seven years, one day when he had carried dinner to some workmen, he was seized by fever, it is said, after having sat upon a stone; the workmen having made him sit beside them, the fever disappeared; he took it again upon sitting anew upon the stone. The account of this alternation of singular effects reached the ears of the prior of the charterhouse. He went to the marvellous stone, and after having established the truth of the account, he had it dug beneath: then there appeared a spring which brought to light the child's faculty for discovering subterranean waters. Little by little his reputation grew, and extended from Dauphiné to the Lyonnais and to Burgundy; but it is said that age was without influence on the perfecting of the faculty with which Bleton was endowed.

He placed horizontally upon the index fingers any rod whatever, fresh or dry, not forked, but a little curved; and however little it might be so, it turned upon its axis from back to front more or less rapidly and for a longer or shorter time, in such a way as to make thirty or thirty-five turns a minute, when the spring was powerful.

§ I. — Mémoire physique et médicinal montrant des rapports évidents entre les phénomènes de la baguette divinatoire, du magnétisme et de l'électricité; by Dr Thouvenel.

153. Dr Thouvenel, having heard tell of Bleton, had him come into Lorraine, in the year 1780, to submit him to trials suited, according to him, to establish what was related of his aptitude for discovering springs. He was so greatly astonished at the simplicity of the Dauphiné dowser and at the sureness with which he proceeded in his researches, that he wrote the result of the trials to which he submitted him, and published them under the title of Mémoire physique et médicinal montrant des rapports évidents entre les phénomènes de la baguette divinatoire, du magnétisme et de l'électricité; Didot the younger, 1781 (volume in-8° of 304 pages). It is this work which made Bleton known to the Parisian public.

154. Thouvenel believes that there rise from subterranean waters and from minerals hidden in the earth effluvia of an electrical nature. In penetrating into the body of the dowser by the feet, the eyes, the lungs, they pass into the blood, act upon the nervous system, and produce a commotion in the chest, Thouvenel assures. A consequence of this action is the rapidity of the pulse, with fever, sweats, syncopes, and sometimes even vomitings; to this state succeeds a malaise of aching weariness, a prostration of strength.

I shall return later to this painful state which Bleton experienced in a high degree, so different from that in which J. Aymar found himself in the same circumstance, for I have pointed out that the latter felt painful impressions only when the rod turned for him over criminals.

However that may be, Thouvenel expresses by the word electro-magnetism the action by virtue of which the dowser concluded the existence of a spring from certain impressions which he said he received from it.

The corpuscles of the Abbé de Lagarde, of Drs Chauvin and Garnier, of the Abbé de Vallemont, are replaced, in the hypothesis of Thouvenel, by electrical effluvia.

135. Let us sum up the effects Bleton, searching for springs, presented to Dr. Thouvenel and to different persons who addressed to that scholar, at his request, an account of their observations. Bleton confessed that the rod was wholly useless to him, that it served only to show those observing him what was happening within him. He regarded it therefore only as a simple index. Hot, dry weather suited his researches better than cold, damp weather. A remark which, in my view, does not lack importance is that Thouvenel says he "perceived several times that the bringing together of the arms and a certain turn of the hand on the dowser's part contributed not a little to giving his rod the first impulse of rotation over weak springs (p. 114)"; I add in support of Thouvenel's observation the following passage from a Letter addressed to him by M. le comte de M…, dated from Chagny: "I was then very much persuaded; but I have grounds to suspect that this rod is a little helped by an almost insensible movement of the shoulder. In any case, I believe no less in Bleton's astonishing sensations, and I have advised him to abandon the rod, having no need of it to confirm a very real phenomenon" (p. 188). Bleton finds springs even with a bandage over his eyes and his forearms only free. The rod turns for him above all when he is over the vertical of the spring; yet there is often a slight deviation. It turns when he is mounted on a tree, on a ladder, on the shoulders of a man who feels no impression of the spring below him. Bleton is sensible to the impression of underground water when he has his head down and his feet up. But the rod placed on the soles of his feet does not turn, which agrees with the remark made above, of the turn of the hand or an almost insensible shoulder movement. When Bleton moves away from the spring, the rod ceases to turn; and when it has reached a determined and invariable distance, the rod sets in motion again, but this time it makes only one turn on its axis, and the movement is the inverse of the first, that is, from front to back. The distance from this point to that where the rod indicated the spring is, says Thouvenel, the measure of the depth at which the water lies.

Although Thouvenel cites many observations according to which Bleton guessed right, this success does not agree with a certificate signed F.-J. F∗∗∗, prior of the Chartreuse of Beaune. The prior certifies the following fact: Bleton indicates a spring at twelve feet deep. A hole six feet in diameter is dug to seven feet deep. There a little spring is found, eleven feet from the stake Bleton had planted. He returns and says that is not the indicated spring. Digging continues, and at about ten feet an abundant spring is found. That is the certified fact. Now the prior, author of the certificate, says: "He is much mistaken as to the depths; he has no other rule for designating them than that given him by Mgr de L∗∗∗, last Bishop of Grenoble, but it is not sure." F.-G. G∗∗∗, prior of the Chartreuse of Lyon, says Bleton was as learned at the age of seven as he is now; experience has taught him that he was fallible as regards the depth and the volume of water, and I believe that is all the progress he has made in his art. Moreover, Bleton himself confessed he was not sure of designating exactly the depth of a spring exceeding thirty feet. Bleton discovers minerals (metals) as well as waters, by the direction of the rod's rotation, because over the former the movement is the inverse of what it is over waters. The prosecutor of the Grande Chartreuse says the rod turns only on one side for other turners, and that they distinguish a spring from a mineral in that a piece of some mineral, put in their hands, arrests the movement if it was determined by water, whereas if it was determined by a mineral, it is increased. The movement caused by a body is therefore increased by the identical of that body.

136. Sigaud de Lafond, the physicist, believed in the rod; he cites a lady in whose hands it turned, and — a remarkable fact, he says — hidden gold and silver acted on her, provided they were not covered with tin, for then the movement ceased.

137. Thouvenel, preoccupied with the idea that the rod turned by virtue of an electric action the dowser transmitted to it, says that double silk gloves prevent the rod's movement without the dowser ceasing to receive the impression of the spring; he adds that silk stockings weaken the action but do not absolutely intercept it, doubtless because the insulation is not perfect.

138. Thouvenel does not say a word of the rod's influence to know the future or discover things within the province of the moral world. But in restricting the rod's domain to the discovery of springs and mines, does he report facts different from those of which I have spoken, and fit to add to the probability of the phenomena? That is what I do not think. Yet it seems that by restricting the rod's domain to the physical world, by showing man's body endowed with the dowser's faculty as necessarily experiencing, in defined circumstances, the neighbourhood of water and of metals — certain electric impressions revealed outside the body by determined phenomena, such as the movement of a rod whose role is reduced to that of a simple index — it seems, I say, that this would make the divining rod easier to accept as a real physical phenomenon by serious minds. In seeking to simplify the facts relating to the rod, by clothing them in a scientific form, one makes for precise minds still more striking the difference distinguishing them from facts belonging to the positive sciences. Thus electrified or magnetic bodies move toward one another and mutually repel; but not one, when free to move, turns on its axis as Bleton's rod does. No body, after moving in a certain place by a permanent physical cause there, and ceasing to move through a displacement that withdrew it from that cause, ever leaves the state of rest again, whatever the place outside the first where it is set. Nothing analogous is known to that single turn of revolution on its axis in the inverse sense of the turn the rod first made. Certainly such an effect shows too much intelligence to be referred to physics properly so called, for evidently the movement effected in the second place by the rod is, from the rigorous standpoint of science, an effect without a cause. This effect presents all the more difficulty to be considered real because it does not belong to Bleton, but a stranger suggested it to him; and on another side, while declaring the rod's movement a simple index, those who believe in its reality speak of a certain turn of the hand and of an almost insensible shoulder movement, which prove, in my view, the settled will to produce that movement.

139. After speaking of the exactness of Bleton's discoveries, people cite rather numerous facts where there was on his part mistake and even real error; and certainly, to say that his sensibility to the impression of underground water is such that the action of the least little thread of it can make him believe in the existence of a powerful spring cannot give proof in support of what has been advanced on the precision of his appreciations. In wishing to reduce Bleton's aptitude to the rigour of a scientific fact, one asks how he feels no disagreeable sensation from water he sees, how he can navigate, and why he has not, like the hydrophobic, a horror of water?

140. § II. Of several writings on the divining rod from 1781 to 1826. The astronomer de Lalande inserted in the Journal des Savants of August 1782 a Letter in which he combated Thouvenel's opinion on the rod, showing that Bleton was a very adroit impostor at making a slightly curved rod placed on his indexes turn on its axis. "Indeed," he says, "if one places on two fingers a metal rod curved in an arc, so that the summit of the arc is lower than the two ends but the whole is almost in equilibrium, the least bringing together of the fingers, were it only a line, will suffice for the ends in their turn to prevail and for the summit of the arc to come on top. If one separates them, instantly…"



General Conclusion Relative to the Rod

154. How have mysterious ideas attached themselves to the rod?

I have said it (37), in showing that, in the most remote antiquity, it was a sign of authority, of power, of command, finally an instrument of divination.

It is as such that it was employed to search for metals towards the XVth century, and subterranean waters in the XVIIth century.

The explanations given of its movement fall into two very different categories. The first comprises those attaching this movement to the moral world, to a spiritual cause, which may be God, the angels, the demon, or again man's own spirit. The second comprises the explanations attaching to the physical world: 1° to properties with which matter is endowed — peripatetics put forward occult properties known under the names of sympathies and antipathies; 2° to corpuscles, to vapours, to subtle matter — an opinion professed by Cartesians; 3° to an imponderable fluid, such as electricity, electro-magnetism, electro-organism, etc. — the opinion of several of our contemporaries.

155. The critical examination of the most remarkable writings to which the rod has given rise has led me to reject every cause from the physical world, following the considerations emitted by Father Malebranche, the Abbé de Rancé, the Abbé Pirot, Father Ménestrier, and above all Father Lebrun. Indeed, the phenomena emanating from a cause of the physical world reproduce themselves in a constant and, as it were, fatal manner in the same circumstances. Well, we have seen the rod's partisans divided into two camps when it is a question of recognising with it the specific nature of a hidden body: some claim that its movement is increased by the contact of a matter identical to that which determined the movement, while the contact of a different matter arrests it; others claim absolutely the inverse. Now, as all affirm they succeed, I ask whether, in circumstances as similar as those of searching with the rod for hidden bodies, one can admit the influence of a physical cause that would produce absolutely contrary phenomena?

156. On another side, the rod's partisans, whoever they may be, theoreticians or exclusively practitioners, recognise in fact the influence of thought — whether will, desire, or intention — of him who holds it. This thought can neutralise the action of material bodies, in such a way that the metal claimed to be active on the rod no longer acts if water is sought, just as the latter ceases to act if a metal is sought; and there is more: all matter ceases to act when one seeks to know whether inheritance boundaries have been displaced, or follows a thief or an assassin by track.

157. Things brought to this point, it is evident to my eyes that the cause of the rod's movement does not belong to the physical world, but to the moral world. Fathers Lebrun, Malebranche, and Ménestrier, the Abbés de Rancé and Pirot, are unanimous in attributing it to the demon. As for me, without hesitation, I think that, in most cases at least, where the rod is held by an upright man who has faith in it, the movement is the consequence of an act of that man's thought. Such is the cause, for example, of the phenomena described by M. le comte Jules de Tristan, and of those which will be in question in the part devoted to the explorer pendulum.



Part Two: Of the Pendulum Called Explorer



Chapter I: Of the Pendulum Called Explorer from Antiquity to 1798

158. The pendulum called explorer is composed, as has been seen, of a solid body suspended from a thread whose free end is held between the fingers. The most ancient citation I can produce where mention is made of it is borrowed from Ammianus Marcellinus (book XXIX, ch. I). It concerns a conspiracy against the Emperor of the East, Valens (Flavius), who reigned from 364 to 378, in which the conspirators gave themselves to magical operations to know the name of Valens' successor. Hilarius, one of them, after undergoing the question, recounts to the judges the magical ceremonies they performed to know the name of Valens' successor. Here is the Latin text:

"And first Hilarius: 'We constructed, magnificent judges, in the likeness of the Delphic tripod, under dire auspices, this ill-fated little table you see, from laurel twigs; and, consecrated ritually with imprecations of secret charms and many long-continued rites, we at last made it move; the method of moving it, whenever it was consulted on hidden things, was as follows. It was placed in the middle of a house purified everywhere with Arabian perfumes; on it was set a perfectly round dish, empty, made of diverse metallic materials; on the rim of its roundness the twenty-four written forms of the letters, incised expertly, were separated by carefully measured spaces. Then a man clad in linen garments, shod likewise with linen shoes, his head bound with a small fillet, carrying verbena of a lucky tree, having appeased with set charms the deity who gives foreknowledge, stood over it with ceremonial science, balancing a ring hanging from fine straps, woven of exceedingly light Carpathian thread and initiated by mystic disciplines; which ring, striking down in succession into the distinct intervals held by the several letters, leaping, produced heroic verses answering the questions, fully concluded in their numbers and measures, such as are read as Pythic, or as uttered from the oracles of the Branchidae. Then, when we asked who would succeed the present emperor, since he was said to be perfect in every part of his training, and the leaping ring had grazed two syllables, ΘEO, with the addition of a final letter, someone of those present cried out that fatal necessity pointed out Theodorus. Nor was the matter explored further, for we were sufficiently persuaded this was he who was sought.'"

There exist two translations of Ammianus Marcellinus, one by the Abbé de Marolles and the other by M. de Moulines. Having had grounds to suspect their exactitude, I asked my honourable colleague M. Naudet kindly to translate the preceding passage, and thanks to his habitual obligingness I can present my readers with a version reproducing as faithfully as possible a text whose lack of clarity is incontestable:

Hilarius began thus: "Magnificent judges, we constructed, after the fashion of the Delphic tripod, with laurel rods, under hellish auspices, this unfortunate table you see, and after having submitted it, in all the rules, to the action of mysterious formulas and conjurations with all their accompaniments, during long hours, we at last succeeded in setting it in motion; now, when it was to be consulted on secret things, the process for making it move was this: it was placed in the middle of a house carefully purified everywhere with perfumes of Arabia; a round dish with nothing in it, made of diverse metals, was set upon it. On the dish's edges were engraved the twenty-four letters of the alphabet, separated exactly by equal intervals. Standing above, someone instructed in the science of magical ceremonies, clothed in linen cloth, with linen shoes, his head bound with a twisted band, and holding foliage of a happy tree, after winning by certain prayers the protection of the god who inspires prophecies, swings a ring suspended from the awning, the ring being woven of a very fine thread and consecrated according to mysterious procedures. This ring, leaping and falling into the intervals of the letters as they successively arrest it, composes heroic verses answering the questions put, and perfectly regular, like those of the Pythia… We asked who would be the successor of the prince now reigning; and as it was said he would be a man of perfect education, the ring having in its leaps touched two syllables, ΘEO, with the addition of a final letter, someone of the company cried out that destiny designated Theodore. The consultation went no further, for we were convinced it was indeed he whom fate designated."

159. This passage has been cited in recent times as proof that the ancients knew turning tables, and I reproduce it with assurance to show that the movements of a ring suspended from a thread were a means of divination, and that consequently the use of the explorer pendulum is not modern, as many people believe. But it must be admitted that Ammianus Marcellinus' text is very obscure, and that one cannot form from it a sufficiently precise idea of the magical process to put it in practice without hesitation: for example, how was the table set in motion? Were hands laid on it, or was the movement the effect of magical operations not involving direct intervention? The text does not say. This lack of precision explains how M. de Moulines could translate it without mentioning the table's movement. On another side, one easily understands…

160. Father G. Schott mentions the exploratory pendulum in his Physica curiosa, printed in 1662 (lib. XII, p. 1532). He speaks of the use that was made of it

Carpathia, which had been consecrated according to the rules of magic (*). This ring, hopping over the intervals which contained the letters, formed answers in heroic verses, complete in number and in measure, and such as the Pythian verses or those rendered by the oracles of the Branchidae. Having therefore inquired who would succeed to the empire, because we had been told that it would be a person accomplished in every respect, the ring, in hopping, touched the two syllables ΘEO and the letter A; someone among those present cried out at once that fate was naming Theodore. Nothing more was asked, since we all knew that he was the one who was desired. »

(*) « This passage is expressed in a very obscure manner in the original, and I have found nothing in the commentators that tends to clarify it. (Translator.) »

to know the hours of the day. I cite the passage as Father Lebrun has already done in his Lettres (1).

161. Father Kircher, in his book De Mundo subterraneo, printed in 1678, also makes mention of the exploratory pendulum.

I do not recall having seen these passages cited in works subsequent to the eighteenth century in which the exploratory pendulum has been discussed.



Chapter II: Of the Explorer Pendulum from 1798 to 1808

162. It appears that the persons who first remarked, in the eighteenth century, the oscillatory movement of the exploratory pendulum, were: an infantry captain attached to the general staff in Paris, named Ulliac; an employee of the higher administration, named Desgranges; finally, M. Ant.-Cl. Gerboin who, in 1808, published at Strasbourg his Recherches expérimentales sur un nouveau mode de l'action électrique (2).

(1) « In the same book, syntagma 2, we discussed the beating of a ring suspended by a thread inside a cup, and indicating the hours. That both effects indeed occur we conceded, but not by virtue of the rod or of the ring, but either by the fraud of those using them, or by the hidden action of an evil demon, or perhaps also by the fancy of the hand stirred into motion. In universal terms, however, I would not dare to assert that a Demon always produces both effects, since it is quite certain to me that most religious and upright men have tried the experiment not once only, and with infallible success. These indeed strenuously defend that it is natural, and that no fraud, nor any influence of fancy, intervenes. But they have not yet persuaded. »

(2) Strasbourg, at J.-G. Levrault's. To be found in Paris, at Gabon et Cie, place de l'École-de-Médecine, etc.

He was then professor at the Special School of Medicine of Strasbourg. Here is how he recounts the origin of his experiments; it goes back to the year 1798. « On one of the evenings of winter, M. Ulliac, who was the possessor of a small apparatus consisting of a hollow wooden sphere, suspended from a thread and enclosing a few seeds, placed it in the hands of a young child, in the hope that it would serve him as an amusement. Having wound around one of this child's fingers the thread which supported the sphere, he ordered him to hold his arm sufficiently extended for the pendulum to acquire a fixed position. The child obeyed; but it was thought to be perceived that the sphere, after a few irregular oscillations, had taken a movement by means of which it described a well-formed circle, the diameter of which kept increasing. I was then arriving at the house where MM. Ulliac and Desgranges were together. We observed together this singular phenomenon, and I was, from that moment, convinced that it presupposed the existence of an active and powerful cause; but I took good care not to form, on the nature of this being, conjectures which, no doubt, would have been as inexact as they were premature. »

After this observation, M. and Mme Ulliac, M. Desgranges, and M. Gerboin recognized in themselves the faculty of making the pendulum move like the young child.

163. Toward the same period, Fortis observed the same phenomenon, and described it. He made use of a pendulum formed of a cube of iron pyrite, suspended from a thread a quarter or half an ell in length, of which he held the free end pinched between two fingers.

164. It was after the death of Fortis, which occurred in 1803, that Ritter repeated his experiment, and made many others analogous to it, an account of which was given, under the title Recherches physiques intéressantes, in a Tübingen journal (1), the Feuille du Matin, no. 26, 30 January 1807.

The article speaks first of the journey that Ritter made in 1806, during which he became acquainted with Campetti the dowser (145). It relates that Ritter went with Campetti to Milan, where Charles Amoretti was, who, too, was endowed with the hydroscopic faculty. He then went to Pavia to converse with Volta. Finally, having returned to Munich with Campetti, he devoted himself to various experiments before Ritter, Schelling and François Baader. Following these experiments, Ritter successfully repeated the experiment of Fortis's pendulum, and added to it a great number that the Feuille du Matin of Tübingen makes known in these terms:

« One takes a cube of pyrite or of native sulfur or any metal whatsoever. The size and the form of this body are immaterial (one may, for example, employ a gold ring). One attaches this body to a piece of thread a quarter or half an ell in length; one holds it pinched between two fingers, and suspended perpendicularly, while preventing any mechanical movement; it is best to moisten the thread a little.

» In this state, one places the pendulum above or sufficiently near a vessel filled with water, or above any metal whatsoever; one chooses, for example, a coin, a plate of zinc or of copper; the pendulum imperceptibly takes elliptical oscillations which form into a circle, and become more and more regular.

» Over the north pole of the magnet, the movement is made from left to right; over the south pole, it is made from right to left.

» Over copper or silver, as over the south pole.

» Over zinc and over water, as over the north pole.

» Care must be taken always to proceed in the same manner, that is to say always to approach the pendulum to the object, either from above downward, or from the side; for, in changing the manner, one also changes the result; the movement which had been made from left to right is made from right to left, and vice versa.

» It is not immaterial either whether the operation is done with the right hand or with the left hand; for, in some individuals, there is such a difference between the right side and the left side that it forms the most pronounced diversity of pole.

» Any supposition of error in these trials is easy to destroy, by this alone that the pendulum is set in motion without any mechanical movement; the regularity of the movements will end by convincing you entirely. You may vary the experiments infinitely; you may even give the pendulum a mechanical impulse opposite to its movement; it will not fail to resume its first direction, when the mechanical force shall have ceased to act.

» If one holds the pendulum over an orange, an apple, etc., on the stem side, the movement is made as over the south pole of the magnet; if one turns the fruit to the opposite side, the movement also changes; the same difference of polarity shows itself at the two ends of a fresh egg.

» It shows itself in a still more striking manner in the different parts of the human body.

» Over the head, the pendulum follows the same movement as over zinc;

» Over the soles of the feet, the same as over copper;

» Over the forehead and over the eyes, north pole;

» Over the nose, south pole;

» Over the mouth, south pole;

» Over the chin, as over the forehead.

» Analogous experiments may be made over all parts of the body. The inner and outer surfaces of the hand act in opposite senses. The pendulum sets itself in motion over each fingertip, and even over the fourth or ring finger, but in a direction opposite to that of the other fingers. This finger also has the faculty of stopping the movement of the pendulum or of giving it another direction, if it is placed alone on the edge of the table on which the experiments are made.

» Abbé Amoretti had already made trials of the same kind on the little finger or auricular finger.

» The opinion of M. Ritter is that the divining rod is nothing other than a double pendulum which, to be set in motion, needs only a force superior to that which produces the effects which have just been described. »

(1) Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände, in the publishing house of J.-G. Cotta, etc.



Chapter III: Of the Experimental Researches of Gerboin on the Explorer Pendulum

165. In 1808 appeared the Recherches expérimentales sur un nouveau mode de l'action électrique, by Ant.-Cl. Gerboin, professor at the Special School of Medicine of Strasbourg, of which I have spoken above. His researches comprise no fewer than 253 experiments, composing a text of 356 pages in-8°. If anything can prejudice reflective minds whose habits are foreign to the experimental sciences, but who are conscious of being able to appreciate a book according to its results and the reasonings employed in support of the author's opinions, it is doubtless the work with which we are about to occupy ourselves. The physicist M. Masson made me acquainted with this book, rather rare today, but interesting in my eyes, because it can be cited in support of my definition of the experimental method. In fact, if physics and chemistry owe to the practice of this method a degree of certainty which is not generally accorded to the sciences called of observation, many people imagine that works which are composed of experiments will thereby have a character of exactness which will be lacking in works pertaining to the sciences of pure observation. Well, that is unfortunately too common an error.

Such a work of observation may really be far more exact than such a work composed of experiments qualified as facts by many people who do not account to themselves for what a fact is in rigorously scientific or rigorously positive language. My proposition will be true, if the author of researches founded on simple observation supports each of his conclusions on propositions which he has controlled by incontestable observations; for, in that case, he will have been faithful to the experimental method, such as I define it; whereas the author of researches called experimental who shall have drawn conclusions whose exactitude will not be demonstrated by ulterior experiments serving them as a control, will thereby have been unfaithful to this method; let us not forget that the character of the latter resides essentially in the control by experiment of a reasoning suggested by simple observation, or deduced from a prior experiment.

166. Let us now give, without critical remark, an overview of Gerboin's work. Let us recall that the pendulum of which he made use was composed of a hemp thread and of a more or less dense sphere or cylinder. The thread had to be a conductor of electricity, and the heavy body which was attached to it was to have neither angles nor points.

Men are endowed, in various degrees, with a faculty or force that Gerboin calls organo-electric, because, according to him, it is composed of electric fluid and of a faculty of the organization.

This faculty, when it is sufficiently intense in a man, manifests itself by the movement taken by a pendulum held by the thumb and the index finger of his right or left hand.

If the movement is normal, the thread and the centre of gravity of the pendulum describe a cone, or, which amounts to the same, the centre of gravity describes a circular curve.

The energy of the organo-electric force shows itself in man under four distinct forms, each of which constitutes the habitual state of a certain number of individuals. These forms are:

1°. The expansive quality;

2°. The compressive quality;

3°. The passive perturbing quality;

4°. The active perturbing quality.

I. The expansive quality is the faculty by which a man sets in moderate and regular movement a pendulum which he holds between the thumb and the index finger, above certain bodies.

The fluid to which Gerboin attributes the effects of the expansive quality is furnished by the cutaneous tissue.

II. The compressive quality manifests itself by the impotence to set in movement the pendulum which one holds between two fingers, and by the faculty of stopping the movement of a pendulum held by a man endowed with the expansive quality, when the man endowed with the compressive quality comes to suitably touch the hand of the first.

The most efficacious contact is that of one of the first three fingers with its fellow, above all that of the middle finger with the middle finger. (Gerboin, pages 45 and 46.) The contact ceasing, the movement recommences.

III. The passive perturbing quality is the expansive faculty at a high degree of energy.

It belongs, not to all men endowed with the expansive faculty, but to certain among them who present the following phenomena:

If the man is endowed with the passive perturbing quality, holds a pendulum, and suitably receives the contact of a man endowed with the expansive quality or of a man endowed with the compressive quality, it will happen:

1°. The pendulum being at rest, that it will take a movement in a sense contrary to that which it would have taken in an ordinary case.

2°. The pendulum being in circular movement from right to left, that it will take a circular movement from left to right, and vice versa.

The movement last produced will become inverse again by a new contact. (Gerboin, pp. 49-50.)

This quality is established by the contact of one of the first three fingers of the hand of the first man with the similar finger of the hand of the second man; the contact of the two middle fingers is the most efficacious (page 50).

Gerboin, who believes in the reality of the movements of the rod caused by bodies, considers all dowsers as endowed with the passive perturbing quality.

IV. The active perturbing quality belongs to a man who, incapable of setting the pendulum in movement, makes the sense or the direction of the oscillations of a pendulum change, when he comes to touch the hand of the one who holds it. The man endowed with the compressive quality without active perturbing quality would reduce the pendulum to rest by the contact. (Gerboin, page 52.)

In short, there are only men endowed with the expansive quality and with the passive perturbing quality who enjoy the faculty of making the pendulum oscillate; men endowed with the compressive quality and with the active perturbing quality therefore produce an effect only by touching men in possession of the first two qualities who hold a pendulum in movement.

167. These distinctions of Gerboin's are far from precise and clear, especially when he envisages them in relation to the fingers of the hand, the essential organs of prehension for holding the pendulum's thread and the principal seat of the qualities previously defined. They manifest themselves above all at the extremities of the fingers of the hand and the foot; sometimes the quality extends to the outer part of the mouth. According to him, the expansive quality manifests when one seizes the pendulum's thread with the tips of the fingers of the hand or foot, the middle finger excepted. He concludes: 1° that the extremity of the fingers is the principal seat of the expansive quality (Gerboin, pp. 61–64); 2° that the middle finger is entirely compressive in its effects (p. 67). One does not see the connexion of these conclusions with the following observations. Two men, endowed about equally with expansive force, are brought together. 1° The pendulum's effects are increased more or less by the contact of the first three fingers; 2° the contact of the ring fingers changes the direction of the movement; 3° the contact of the little fingers makes it cease. Gerboin concludes: 1° that the ring finger has the perturbing quality; 2° that the little finger has the compressed quality (p. 72). Finally, when a man endowed with the faculty of perturbation is put in communication with a man actually exercising the expansive influence, the contact of each of the five fingers produces the perturbing effect (p. 71). All the fingers therefore develop the same effect (p. 72)!

168. Man's organo-electric influence is susceptible of being modified by the bodies placed beneath the pendulum, bodies Gerboin qualifies as explored. The explored bodies acting on the pendulum may be inorganic bodies or organised beings.

Inorganic bodies (including the immediate principles of organised beings). 169. Minerals can give rise to three effects on the pendulum: 1° they are without action; 2° the circular movement they impart turns from left to right — the sense Gerboin calls oxygen, attributed to vitreous or positive electricity, to the expansive force or quality; 3° the circular movement turns from right to left — the sense Gerboin calls hydrogen, attributed to resinous or negative electricity, to the compressive force or quality. A. The bodies acting on the pendulum from left to right are: arsenic, charcoal; zinc, antimony, bismuth, cobalt, water, alumina, the black and red oxides of iron, oxide of zinc; flowers of antimony, oxide of bismuth, brown oxide of copper, yellow and red oxide of lead, black and red oxide of mercury; the flame of phosphorus, the phosphoric, arsenic, sulfuric, nitric, boracic, oxalic, nitrous acids; alum; the ligneous body of plants no longer living, starch, white gum, sugar, milk sugar. B. The bodies acting from right to left are: sulfur, phosphorus; wrought iron, beaten iron, tin, lead, copper, platinum, silver, mercury; the sulfides of iron, copper, mercury; the muriatic, phosphorous, sulfurous, benzoic acids; sea salt, magnesia, potash, soda; the flame of a candle; sal ammoniac, dry soap; sulfuric ether, oil of thyme, camphor, resins and succin; dry fibrin, cerebral pulp. C. The bodies that do not act on the pendulum are: the diamond; frozen water, snow, pure silica, limpid and opaque hyaline quartz when not impregnated with metallic oxides; glass based on siliceous earth containing few metallic substances; vitreous phosphoric acid; vitrified borax; the flame of alcohol; bleached cotton, raw or white silk; wool, etc. D. Gerboin names bodies one might call capricious, because they do not act constantly in the same manner, and sometimes do not act at all: coal, especially if pyritous; plumbago; blende, orpiment; various metallic ores; black schist, Florence stone; several vegetable and animal substances in a beginning state of decomposition.

170. Gerboin makes the inorganic substances' action on the pendulum depend on their chemical composition, on their figure, on the situation of their part in regard to the pendulum, and finally on their mass. The action on the pendulum is the more regular as the body is formed of a smaller number of principles and the combination is more exact. A plane surface is more favourable to the action than an angular surface. The centre of a symmetrical figure always extinguishes the movement or prevents it from occurring. The two halves of the same surface hold from their mathematical state opposed properties and a sort of polarity. Finally, the same body acts with the more intensity as its mass, in relation to the pendulum, is more considerable, and as that mass presents more surface.

Organised beings. 171. Organised beings considered as explored bodies — that is, as bodies submitted to the pendulum's action — presented to Gerboin the following phenomena: the pendulum placed above the first two fingers of the hand or foot, or above the surface of the body endowed with the compressive property, oscillates from left to right. Above the tip of the ring finger, or below the surface of the body endowed with the perturbing property, it oscillates from right to left. Finally, above the middle and fifth fingers and on the median line of the body or its principal lines, the pendulum does not set in motion. Vegetables present analogous phenomena, but they are more complex. The action results almost always from the vital quality of the parts, their forms, and their intimate constitution. Gerboin concludes that the reaction excited by organised beings does not really differ from that which inorganic bodies give birth to. In all the preceding, I have kept as far as possible the author's expressions. I shall take up again further on some of his observations and experiments to show that they fall within the principle of explanation I shall set out.



Chapter IV: Of the Researches of M. Chevreul on the Pendulum Called Explorer

172. The curiosity I have had at all times to know the facts within the province of the history of man's faculties made me profit from the friendship of the respectable M. Deleuze to initiate myself into animal magnetism, and to study its phenomena on all the occasions that presented themselves to me from 1810 to 1813. One day — it was in 1812 — M. Deleuze spoke to me, in my laboratory, of the pendulum of Fortis and of Ch. Amoretti, and suggested to me the desire to try to reproduce its effects. That is what I did at once. In communicating the results of my trials to M. Oersted, who was then following at Paris the printing of the French translation of his Researches on the Identity of Chemical and Electric Forces, and with whom I had frequent conversations, he confessed to me that, despite the case he made of Ritter's ideas, his opinion was not yet settled on the cause of the movement of Fortis' pendulum. Various motives it is superfluous to give made me adjourn the publication of my experiments to the year 1833, when they appeared in the form of a Letter addressed to M. Ampère. M. Oersted, after taking cognisance of it at Copenhagen, wrote to me that he entirely shared my manner of seeing. In 1846 (Comptes rendus de l'Académie des Sciences, t. XXIII, p. 1082), two former pupils of the École Polytechnique, MM. Desplaces and Chabert, and M. Robert having communicated to the Academy of Sciences experiments on Fortis' pendulum, I permitted myself to recall mine, and in the Compte rendu of the session of 14 December 1846 an extract of the Letter from the Revue des Deux-Mondes was inserted. Finally, when this year there was question of turning tables, I saw with satisfaction the welcome given to my ideas by several French and foreign journals. And this satisfaction increased further with the literary researches to which I devoted myself on the divining rod and the explorer pendulum. In reproducing textual passages of my Letter, one will see the analogies of the facts described there with those offered me by authors whose works I did not know in 1812 at the time of my experiments, and in 1833 at the time of their publication. But if the analogy of the facts is evident, the interpretation I gave of them differs absolutely from those of which they had previously been the object.

Letter of M. E. Chevreul to M. Ampère on a particular class of muscular movements; L'Hay, near Paris, 23 March 1833 (Revue des Deux-Mondes, May issue).

173. If I were not interested as an experimenter in my readers' knowing perfectly the Letter inserted in 1833 in the Revue des Deux-Mondes, I would now reproduce only a fragment of it, the rest to be disseminated with development in the fourth and fifth parts of this work. But if a textual and complete reproduction has the drawback of giving rise to repetitions, it has in my view the great advantage of offering proof that my present opinions are those I expressed twenty years ago…



Letter of M. E. Chevreul to M. Ampère, on a particular class of muscular movements (1833)

My dear friend,

You ask me for a description of the experiments which I made in 1812 in order to know whether it is true, as several persons had assured me, that a pendulum formed of a heavy body and of a flexible thread oscillates when one holds it in the hand above certain bodies, although the arm is immobile. You think that these experiments have some importance; in yielding to the reasons which you have given me for publishing them, let it be permitted me to say that it

required all the faith which I have in your enlightenment to determine me to place under the eyes of the public facts of a kind so different from those with which I have entertained it up to now. However that may be, I shall, following your desire, set out my observations; I shall present them in the order in which I made them.

The pendulum of which I made use was an iron ring suspended from a hemp thread; it had been arranged by a person who desired very keenly that I should verify myself the phenomenon which manifested itself when she placed it above water, a block of metal, or a living being: a phenomenon of which she made me a witness. It was not, I confess, without surprise that I saw it reproduce itself, when, having myself seized with my right hand the thread of the pendulum, I had placed the latter above the mercury of my pneumato-chemical trough, an anvil, several animals, etc.

"I concluded from my experiments that if there were, as I was assured, only a certain number of bodies fit to determine the pendulum's oscillations, it might happen that by interposing other bodies between the first and the moving pendulum, the latter would stop. Despite my presumption, my astonishment was great when, after taking in the left hand a plate of glass, a cake of resin, etc., and placing one of these bodies between mercury and the pendulum oscillating above it, I saw the oscillations diminish in amplitude and be entirely annihilated. They recommenced when the intermediate body was withdrawn, and were annihilated again by the interposition of the same body. This succession of phenomena repeated itself a great number of times with a truly remarkable constancy, whether the intermediate body was held by me or by another person. The more these effects appeared extraordinary to me, the more I felt the need to verify whether they were really foreign to every muscular movement of the arm, as had been affirmed to me in the most positive manner.

"This led me to rest the right arm holding the pendulum on a wooden support which I made advance at will from the shoulder to the hand and return from the hand toward the shoulder. I soon remarked that in the first circumstance the pendulum's movement decreased the more as the support approached the hand, and that it ceased when the fingers holding the thread were themselves supported, while in the second circumstance the contrary effect took place; yet for equal distances of the support from the thread, the movement was slower than before. I thought from this that it was very probable that a muscular movement taking place without my knowledge determined the phenomenon; and I was to take this opinion into consideration all the more because I had a memory — vague, to be sure — of having been in a very particular state when my eyes followed the oscillations described by the pendulum I held in my hand.

"I remade my experiments, the arm perfectly free, and I convinced myself that the memory of which I have just spoken was not an illusion of my mind, for I felt very well that at the same time as my eyes followed the oscillating pendulum, there was in me a disposition or tendency to movement, which, all involuntary as it seemed to me, was the more satisfied the greater the arcs the pendulum described; from that moment I thought that if I repeated the experiments blindfolded, the results might be quite different from those I observed. That is precisely what happened. While the pendulum oscillated above the mercury, a bandage was applied to my eyes: the movement soon diminished; but though the oscillations were weak, they did not sensibly diminish by the presence of the bodies that had seemed to arrest them in my first experiments. Finally, from the moment the pendulum was at rest, I held it yet for a quarter of an hour above the mercury without its setting in motion again; and during that time, and still without my knowledge, the glass plate or the cake of resin was interposed and withdrawn several times.

"Here is how I interpret these phenomena: When I held the pendulum in my hand, a muscular movement of my arm, though insensible to me, took the pendulum out of the state of rest, and the oscillations once begun were soon increased by the influence sight exercised in putting me in that particular state of disposition or tendency to movement. Now it must be recognised that the muscular movement, even when increased by this same disposition, is nevertheless weak enough to stop — I do not say under the empire of the will, but when one simply has the thought of trying whether such a thing will arrest it. There is therefore an intimate liaison established between the execution of certain movements and the act of thought relative to them, though this thought is not yet the will that commands the muscular organs. It is in this that the phenomena I have described seem to me of some interest for psychology, and even for the history of the sciences: they prove how easy it is to take illusions for realities whenever we occupy ourselves with a phenomenon in which our organs have some part, and that in circumstances that have not been sufficiently analysed.

"Indeed, had I confined myself to making the pendulum oscillate above certain bodies, and to the experiments where its oscillations were arrested when glass, resin, etc., were interposed between the pendulum and the bodies seeming to determine its movement, I would certainly have had no reason not to believe in the divining rod and in other things of the same kind. Now one will conceive without difficulty how men of very good faith, and otherwise enlightened, are sometimes led to have recourse to wholly chimerical ideas to explain phenomena that do not really depart from the physical world we know. (I conceive very well that a man of good faith, whose whole attention is fixed on the movement a rod he holds in his hands can take from a cause unknown to him, may receive from the least circumstance the tendency to movement necessary to bring about the manifestation of the phenomenon occupying him. For example, if this man seeks a spring and his eyes are not bandaged, the sight of a green, abundant turf on which he walks may determine in him, without his knowledge, the muscular movement capable of disturbing the rod, by the liaison established between the idea of active vegetation and that of water.)

"Once convinced that nothing truly extraordinary existed in the effects that had caused me so much surprise, I found myself in a disposition so different from that in which I was the first time I observed them that long afterwards, and at diverse epochs, I have tried, but always in vain, to reproduce them. In invoking your testimony on a fact that passed under your eyes more than twelve years ago, I shall prove to our readers that I am not the only person on whom sight had influence to determine the oscillations of a hand-held pendulum. One day when I was at your house with General P∗∗∗** and several other persons, you doubtless remember that my experiments became one of the subjects of conversation; that the general manifested the desire to know their details, and, after I had set them out to him, did not dissimulate how much the influence of sight on the pendulum's movement was contrary to all his ideas. You remember that on my proposal that he make the experiment himself, he was struck with astonishment when, after putting his left hand over his eyes for some minutes and then withdrawing it, he saw the pendulum he held in his right hand absolutely motionless, though it oscillated rapidly at the moment his eyes ceased to see it."

"The preceding facts and the interpretation that I have given of them have led me to connect them with others that we can observe every day: by this connection, the analysis of these latter becomes at once both simpler and more precise than it has been, at the same time that one forms an ensemble of facts whose general interpretation is susceptible of a great extension. But, before going further, let us recall well that my observations present two principal circumstances:

"I. To think that a pendulum held in the hand can move, and that it does move without one's being conscious that the muscular organ imparts any impulse to it: that is a first fact.

"II. To see this pendulum oscillate, and that its oscillations become more extensive through the influence of sight upon the muscular organ and always without one's being conscious of it: that is a second fact."

"(1). The tendency to movement, determined in us by the sight of a body in movement, is found again in several cases, for example:

"1°. When, the attention being entirely fixed upon a bird that flies, upon a stone that cleaves the air, upon water that flows, the body of the spectator directs itself in a more or less pronounced manner toward the line of movement;

"2°. When a player at bowls or at billiards, following with the eye the moving object to which he has imparted movement, carries his body in the direction which he desires to see this moving object follow, as if it were still possible for him to direct it toward the goal which he wished to make it attain.

"When we walk upon a slippery plane, everyone knows with what promptitude we throw ourselves to the side opposite to that toward which our body is drawn as a consequence of a loss of equilibrium; but a circumstance less generally known is that a tendency to movement manifests itself even when it is impossible for us to move in the direction of this tendency: for example, in a carriage, the fear of overturning stiffens you in the direction opposite to that which threatens you, and there result from it efforts all the more painful as fright and irritability are greater. I believe that, in ordinary falls, letting oneself fall has fewer disadvantages than the effort attempted to prevent the fall. It is in this manner that I understand the justness of the proverb: There is a God for children and for drunkards.

"The fact that I have just cited leads naturally to the case where, being placed upon the cornice of a mountain, whose breadth presents a way much broader than that which would be strictly necessary if one were walking upon a highway, one suddenly comes to discover the depth of an abyss that one has beneath oneself; at the same moment, so to speak, one throws oneself irresistibly to the side opposite to the abyss, pushed by the instinct of self-preservation which struggles against a tendency to movement in the contrary direction, determined by the sight of the abyss. This tendency is still remarkable when one finds oneself upon a bridge without guard-rails, placed above a precipice; this precipice, seen from one side of the bridge, makes you throw yourself to the opposite side, and puts you in the same state of anxiety as that from which you wished to withdraw yourself. Thus, solicited successively in two opposite directions, you are struck with stupor and reduced to immobility, if indeed too keen a fear of falling on the side where you are does not make you run the danger of throwing yourself to the opposite side. Such is, in the case of which we speak, the position of a man who has not been accustomed to walk in a narrow way suspended over an abyss, whereas the man who has this habit walks there as surely as upon a highway, for the reason that, free from fright, he does not think at all of the danger which the first dreads. Finally the position of the latter could become still more critical if he were led to discover the depth of the abyss in the case where, following with the eye the flight of a bird or the throw of a stone, etc., he had already obeyed up to a certain point this tendency which carries us toward a body that moves (1).

"The tendency to movement in a determined direction, resulting from the attention that one gives to a certain object, seems to me the first cause of several phenomena that are generally referred to imitation: thus, in the case where sight and even hearing carry our thought to a person who yawns, the muscular movement of yawning is ordinarily in us the consequence; I could say as much of the communication of laughter, and this example itself presents, more than any other analogue, a circumstance which appears to me to support greatly the interpretation that I give of these phenomena: it is that laughter, weak at first, can, if it is prolonged, excuse the expression, accelerate itself (as we have seen the oscillations of the pendulum held in the hand increase in amplitude under the influence of sight), and laughter accelerating itself can go as far as convulsion.

"I do not doubt at all that the spectacle of certain actions proper to act strongly upon our frail machine, that the animated account by voice and gesture of these same actions, or, again, the knowledge that one takes of them by a simple reading, do not carry certain individuals to these same actions, as a consequence of a tendency to movement which thus determines them mechanically to an act to which they would never have thought without a circumstance foreign to their will, and to which they would never have been led by what one must name instinct in animals.

"The great actor is he whose gesture and the movement of the physiognomy correspond to the movement which the sentiments that he translates upon the stage must have excited in the character that he represents.

"The history painter who has studied nature seizes the position that the originals of the personages he paints must have had when they concurred in the act that the canvas must reproduce.

"The great poet is he whose verses awaken in those who listen to him the movements corresponding to the facts that he sings: such is the account of a piece of the Iliad which carries Alexander to throw himself upon his arms.

"In terminating here the exposition of the facts which appear to me to be linked to my observations, I believe I ought to make a remark, which is indeed implicitly in what I have said, but which could escape some reader: it is that this tendency to movement to which I refer the first cause of a great number of our actions takes place only insofar as we are in a certain state, which is precisely what the magnetizers call faith. The existence of this state is perfectly demonstrated by the account of my experiments: effectively, as long as I believed possible the movement of the pendulum that I held in my hand, it took place;

"but after having discovered the cause of it, it was no longer possible for me to reproduce it.

"It is because we are not always in the same state that we do not constantly receive the same impression from the same thing. Thus the yawning of another does not always make us yawn; laughter is not always communicated from the laugher to his neighbor, etc.

"The great orator who wishes to make the crowd that listens to him share the passion that animates him does not arrive at his goal at first approach; he begins by predisposing his audience to it, and it is only after having made himself master of it that he launches his last argument, his last stroke.

"The great poet, the great writer, constantly use the same artifice; they first prepare their reader to receive a final impression.

"Nothing more curious, in the study of the causes which determine the actions of man, than the knowledge of the means employed by the merchant to call first, and then to fix, the attention of the buyer upon the qualities of the object that he wishes to make him take, than the knowledge of the means employed by the conjurer to make such a card rather than any other be drawn from a pack of cards, or to carry the attention of the spectator upon a certain thing, in order to distract it from another, a distraction without which the conjurer would not cause the surprise which is the final object of his art. It results from these considerations that the most diverse professions employ means entirely analogous, although excessively varied, to arrive at one same end, that of first seizing the attention of man, in order to produce afterwards upon him a determined effect.

"I believe that my observations are linked to the history of the faculties of animals: that there are some of their acts that have been attributed to instinct, which fall into the class of those of which I have spoken. It would be above all in animals that live in troops that it would appear to me interesting to study, in this respect, the influence of the leaders upon the subordinate individuals. Finally, do not the facts that I have cited throw some light upon the cause of the fascination that one animal makes another experience?

"I believe that my observations are also of a nature to have to fix the attention of physiologists who, like M. Flourens, have examined in an entirely particular manner the movements which supervene in animals after the ablation of determined parts of their nervous system; it would seem to me important to appreciate the influence that the ablation of such of these parts can exercise upon the manifestation of the phenomena which are the subject of this Letter.

"Such are, my dear friend, the objects that you have considered as being susceptible of interesting persons who think with us that the march to follow in psychology is that which has been traced by the men to whom the natural sciences owe their progress and who share our conviction, that there is no positive metaphysics for whoever is ignorant of the great truths of the physical and mathematical sciences. The study of the faculties of man is invariably linked, not only to the knowledge of the means that he has put in use to arrive at founding each of the special branches of these same sciences, but it is still so to the knowledge of the faculties of animals. Before seeking to compose a general system of philosophy, it is necessary to have assembled as great a number as possible of groups of analogous facts, and, moreover, it is necessary that the facts of each group have been previously deepened by particular studies.

"Accept, my dear friend, etc.,

"Chevreul."

(1) I give here the continuation of the Letter, in order to avoid, as I have said, for readers who would wish to know it in its entirety, the trouble of seeking it in the Revue des Deux-Mondes.

(1) It is not impossible that in seasickness something analogous to what I have just said takes place in us.



Part Three: Of Turning Tables and of Striking or Speaking Tables

175. The explorer pendulum, object of a special work on my part, could be examined with detail in the second part of this work, as the divining rod could likewise be in the first part, because of the analogy of its movement with that of the pendulum, and because of the study of the occult sciences to which I devoted myself on the occasion of my considerations on the history of alchemy. It is thus spontaneously that I was led to write on the explorer pendulum and the divining rod. It was otherwise with turning tables; the examination of which they will be the subject is wholly accidental, and I wish the reader to know it well before going further.

176. I said that on 21 March 1853 the Academy of Sciences referred to the examination of a Commission of which I was the reporter, first a Memoir on the search for underground waters by means of the divining rod, by M. Riondet (of Var), and later a Letter on the circular movement of tables, by M. Kœppelin, of Colmar. It was in the time elapsed between these two communications that I heard turning tables spoken of for the first time, and that I learned the application several organs of the press had made to this phenomenon of the explanation I had given of the explorer pendulum's movement. That is what engaged me to treat this subject. It is therefore, I repeat, a purely accidental cause. Hence the reader must not be astonished at the brevity with which I shall treat this subject, and that I shall insist hardly at all except on the rotary movement of tables, wishing, as to their language, to confine myself to a historical summary sufficient to show the analogy they may have with the divining rod answering the questions addressed to it. For these reasons, and in the impossibility I would be in, even if I wished it, of making a critical examination of the writings concerning turning tables and striking or speaking tables in the order of their publication, I shall speak of the phenomena of tables following the order in which they came to my knowledge. I shall accordingly treat of turning tables, and then of striking or speaking tables.



§ I. Of Turning Tables

177. I confess it: when I heard turning tables spoken of, and learned that their rotary movement had been explained conformably to the explanation I had given in 1833 of the explorer pendulum's movement, the explanation appeared founded to me, and despite all the objections made to it, I believe it true still in many cases, as I shall say in the fourth part. For the present, I shall speak of the facts of which I have been witness; in setting them out methodically, I shall make their comparison easier with what I have said of the rod and the explorer pendulum.

178. First and second fact. — One person applies the hand to a pedestal table or a little round table, and it happens that the furniture stays at rest, or that it turns on itself. I have been witness of both facts.

179. Third and fourth fact. — Several persons apply their hands to a pedestal table or round table, in such a way as to establish a continuous chain because they touch fingers, or they apply them without touching. The furniture stays at rest, or it takes a movement of rotation.

180. Witness of these facts, but much more often of negative facts than of positive ones, I have never had occasion, in cases of movement, to observe that it was out of proportion with an action the hands laid on the table were capable of exercising laterally: I speak, of course, only of what I have seen. The movement, in effect, will never take place as long as the hands press the table perpendicularly; but because of the difficulty of maintaining this pressure constantly perpendicular during a lapse of time varying from a quarter of an hour to an hour and more, it happens that the action of the hands is represented by a perpendicular action ineffective for the movement, and a lateral action from left to right or from right to left, which alone is capable of putting the table in motion. It is to bring this lateral pressure into evidence that it had been proposed:



§ II. Of Striking or Speaking Tables

1°. To have the table pressed through the intermediary of a ball placed under each finger: in the case where the pressure had been simply perpendicular, the ball would have remained in place; in the contrary case, it would have escaped to the left or to the right, or even forward or backward;

2°. Or to have it pressed through the intermediary of discs from a checkerboard whose place would have been circumscribed by a line: in the case of a lateral pressure, they would have gone out of their respective circles;

3°. Or to have it pressed through the intermediary of two equal circles of which the lower would have been fixed to the table in some manner, while the upper surface of this circle, excessively smooth or polished, would have been in contact with the lower surface of the second circle, likewise polished; for little lateral pressure there might have been, this circle in sliding would have ceased to cover the lower circle;

4°. Or to have each finger placed between two trails of fine sand: in the case of a lateral pressure, the sand would have been displaced in the direction of the movement.

181. Several authors having attributed the movement of the tables to an imponderable fluid obeying a man's will, a physicist of Italy imagined an apparatus composed of a metallic ring which he judged to be of a nature to conduct the supposed fluid into a table surrounded by the ring and communicating with it. There was not the least movement, the hands being placed on the ring.

The illustrious Mr. Faraday was no more fortunate when it was a question of researching whether there was manifestation of electricity or of magnetism. He made the movement depend on a suite of impulses which were distributed in the whole mass of the table, in such a manner that there arrived a moment when their sum, in surmounting its inertia, put it in movement.

§ II. — Of striking or speaking tables.

182. It is clear, from what I have just said of turning tables, that they presented themselves to my examination as objects of study which did not go out of my habitual researches, especially after the application made to their movement by others than by me, of my explanation of the movement of the exploratory pendulum; it is later that I heard speak of the marvels of their intelligence. A critical examination of the writings of which they have been the object, corresponding to that which I have previously made of writings concerning the divining rod and the exploratory pendulum, would be impossible; for, the former not being special like the latter, I would be drawn into discussions entirely outside the frame of this work. It is what the reader will see by the succinct summary which I am going to trace of the most general things which are exposed in the writings to which I allude.

183. The extreme variety of the matters treated in the American writings on the tables, which I have had occasion to peruse, is such, that he who would wish to render a critical and reasoned account of them truly instructive, ought to approach all the principal questions raised by the diverse manners in which the invisible world has been represented; for these writings admit without discussion the reality of animal magnetism, of the divinatory art, of necromancy or rather of the means of evoking the spirits of the dead. It would therefore be necessary to discuss first whether this reality exists, and in the case of the affirmative to discuss the degree of probability of the particular propositions which are advanced as demonstrated facts, and moreover to envisage the subject from the theological point of view, in order to distinguish the licit from what is not. The critic would therefore be obliged to treat subjects entirely outside that of which I posed the limits in speaking in my introduction of the reserves which I made there so as not to go out of the field of my habitual studies (24).

184. If it is true that in America the origin of the direction of ideas toward the invisible world goes back to the Fox family, here is how the facts would have passed.

At Hydesville, village of the State of New York, is found a house in which a tenant heard noises which seemed knocks struck at the door and in different places of the house, without his being able to explain the cause to himself. The Fox family, Methodist, which, after him, inhabited this house in 1848, heard similar noises, but stronger and more frequently repeated.

The Fox family counted four individuals, the husband, the wife and two young girls.

One evening, these latter were near going to bed, and knocks made themselves heard, when one of them, without intention, having made her fingers snap, the noise was, immediately reproduced as by an echo. The other young girl strikes in her hand, in saying: count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and she is obeyed.

Mrs. Fox asks the age of her children, and a number of knocks equal to that of the years of each of them is the response.

To the question: Are you a human being? absolute silence.

If you are a spirit, respond by two knocks? and the two knocks are struck.

Finally, the spirit responds that it is that of a peddler who was assassinated at the age of thirty-one years, and who was buried in the house. He was named Charles Rayn, says he.

The language of the spirit was very simple; the series of the letters of the alphabet was pronounced successively, and it struck at each letter which was pronounced in the order of the words of the response. Example: for the word Charles it struck successively.

In the 1st review of the alphabet, at the letters C, H.

2nd A, R.

3rd at the letter L.

4th at the letters E.

In writing successively the struck letters, one had the word Charles.

185. Scarcely were these facts known, that travelers in crowd wished to verify them at Hydesville, on the very places. The Fox family having left this village to inhabit at Rochester, the same facts reproduced themselves there, and thousands of persons were witnesses of them.

It is thus that the spiritual manifestations, or spiritualism, as one says in America, propagated themselves rapidly in all the States of the Union.

186. The phenomena by which the spirits manifest themselves are very different and very varied: I will cite some, as examples, of several sorts.

A. — Phenomena of acoustics.

187. There are noises which are compared to the sounds which boards, tables struck several times in succession by the articulation of a finger folded in two, render; others recall the cry of the saw, the noises of a plane passed against a board, of the weaver's shuttle, of the rain falling against a roof or panes, the bellowing of the waves of the sea, and even the rolling of thunder.

One sometimes hears the sound of bells, of military marches, of airs of violin, of guitar, etc.

B. — Phenomena of translation.

188. Without apparent cause or on the demand of a person, items of furniture, like tables, secretaries, commodes, desks, books, objects of all sorts, put themselves of themselves in movement; tables lean beyond 45 degrees, and however the objects which they support do not slide to the ground.

Vases overturn themselves, break themselves without apparent cause.

Projectiles launched one knows not whence, break windows, mirrors, etc.

Men are transported from one end of an apartment to the other; there are some who remain suspended some instants in the air against the law of heaviness.

C. — Optical phenomena.

189. Phantoms or images of men, of women, of children appear; sometimes one sees only hands without arms.

Vaporous grey columns show themselves in the air.

An apartment appears all of a sudden lit, and a lit apartment ceases instantly to be so.

D. — Intellectual phenomena.

190. The intellectual phenomena are not bounded to the responses made to questions of which I have cited examples.

The spirits compose phrases and works even in prose and in verse. The library of the Institute possesses the opuscules of a chair of Guadeloupe which come out of the Government printing office.

They comprise the following pieces:

1°. Juanita, short story in prose;

2°. Magnetism, proverb in six characters;

3°. Inspirations;

4°. Poetry. The editor observes that the spirit contented itself in these verses with euphonic rhyme, and that it did not believe it ought to correct them.

To judge by the quatrains addressed to Miss V., Miss E...., Miss M., Miss C...., the spirit would be masculine, and several of its verses recall those of the Faithful Shepherd of the rue des Lombards, notably the quatrain addressed to Miss C...:

There is an angel, young girl, Who, simple at once and gentle, Promises a celestial happiness To him who will take her heart.

191. One sees that the extraordinary phenomena which we have just passed in review have been attributed, from the origin of their manifestation, to intelligent causes, to spirits.

The American believers say that the spirits give themselves for belonging to very different categories of which I will count three principal.

192. First category: Spirits of individuals of the human species who are dead.

a. They can be those of relatives or of friends of the persons who interrogate them, either directly, or indirectly, as I will say presently, through the intermediary of individuals whom one names mediums in the United States.

b. They can be those of obscure individuals who have had no relation with the persons to whom they manifest themselves; such is the spirit of the peddler Charles Rayn, who manifested himself from 1848 to the Fox family when it dwelt at Hydesville.

c. They can be those of persons who have played a great role in the history of the United States, such as Washington, Jefferson, Adams, etc.

d. They can be those of so-called reformers of religion, of chiefs of sects, of illuminati, such as Luther, Calvin, Swedenborg, Martin, etc.

e. They can be those of apostles, of saints.

f. They can be those of the damned.

193. Second category: Celestial spirits.

There are some who have given themselves for angels, and for Jesus Christ himself.

194. Third category: Infernal spirits.

There are some who say themselves infernal spirits, devils, demons, Satan.

195. It is necessary to speak now of mediums. Little time after the American public knew the phenomena which had passed in the Fox family, certain persons were distinguished in a quite special manner by the power to determine the spirits to manifest themselves which the believers attributed to them. Thence their name of mediums, which signifies intermediaries between the spirits and men deprived of the power to act on the same spirits.

196. The aptitude of the citizens of the United States for commerce and industry is incontestable. The whole world knows it. Well, it has not failed when it has been a question of entering into communication with the spirits. Today one is a medium in the States of the Union as one is there merchant, industrialist, doctor, lawyer, and it is assured that mediums in reputation find great pecuniary advantages to put the common of men in relation with the spirits.

At the beginning of 1853, one counted not less than 700 mediums in the city of Cleveland, and 1,200 in that of Cincinnati.

197. Mediums of different kinds are distinguished.

a. There are some who are qualified as rapping, because the spirits respond to their invocation by noises similar to knocks struck against some sonorous body.

A young professor of London was speaking to us, these last days, of a celebrated English physiologist who makes similar noises heard without one being able to divine the very simple artifice of which he makes use. Even when one knows that he is the cause of these noises, he strikes the interior of his shoe with one of the toes, as one does, for example, in placing the middle finger of the right hand on a table, then making the index which was raised on it snap against it.

b. There are writing mediums who, deprived of all spontaneity, so great is the power of the spirit by which they are possessed, trace with a pen or a pencil all that the spirit wishes to make them write or draw.

The arm of these mediums is generally stiff as if it were affected by tetanus.

c. The speaking mediums, inspired by a spirit, pronounce words, either in the state of wakefulness or of natural sleep, often with a timbre of voice very different from their habitual timbre. It is recounted that mediums having wished to resist the spirit which possessed them have fallen into violent convulsions, so jealous is the spirit of the prerogatives of command.

The speaking mediums, in prey to this dominating spirit, pronounce sermons, political discourses. They speak, it is assured, languages which are unknown to them.

